Information : October 21, 1984
Information : The Second Reagan-Mondale Presidential Debate
Dorothy Ridings : Good evening from the Municipal Auditorium in Kansas City.
Dorothy Ridings : I am Dorothy Ridings, the president of the League of Women Voters, the sponsor of this final Presidential debate of the 1984 campaign between Republican Ronald Reagan and Democrat Walter Mondale.
Dorothy Ridings : Our panelists for tonight's debate on defense and foreign policy issues are Georgie Anne Geyer, syndicated columnist for Universal Press Syndicate; Marvin Kalb, chief diplomatic correspondent for NBC News; Morton Kondracke, executive editor of the New Republic magazine; and Henry Trewhitt, diplomatic correspondent for the Baltimore Sun.
Dorothy Ridings : Edwin Newman, formerly of NBC News and now a syndicated columnist for King Features, is our moderator.
Dorothy Ridings : Ed.
Edwin Newman : Dorothy Ridings, thank you.
Edwin Newman : A brief word about our procedure tonight.
Edwin Newman : The first question will go to Mr. Mondale.
Edwin Newman : He'll have 21/2 minutes to reply.
Edwin Newman : Then the panel member who put the question will ask a followup.
Edwin Newman : The answer to that will be limited to 1 minute.
Edwin Newman : After that, the same question will be put to President Reagan.
Edwin Newman : Again, there will be a followup.
Edwin Newman : And then each man will have 1 minute for rebuttal.
Edwin Newman : The second question will go to President Reagan first.
Edwin Newman : After that, the alternating will continue.
Edwin Newman : At the end there will be 4-minute summations, with President Reagan going last.
Edwin Newman : We have asked the questioners to be brief.
Edwin Newman : Let's begin.
Edwin Newman : Ms. Geyer, your question to Mr. Mondale.
Edwin Newman : Central America
Georgie Anne Geyer : Mr. Mondale, two related questions on the crucial issue of Central America.
Georgie Anne Geyer : You and the Democratic Party have said that the only policy toward the horrendous civil wars in Central America should be on the economic development and negotiations, with perhaps a quarantine of Marxist Nicaragua.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Do you believe that these answers would in any way solve the bitter conflicts there?
Georgie Anne Geyer : Do you really believe that there is no need to resort to force at all?
Georgie Anne Geyer : Are not the solutions to Central America's gnawing problems simply, again, too weak and too late?
Walter Mondale : I believe that the question oversimplifies the difficulties of what we must do in Central America.
Walter Mondale : Our objectives ought to be to strengthen the democracies, to stop Communist and other extremist influences, and stabilize the community in that area.
Walter Mondale : To do that we need a three-pronged attack: one is military assistance to our friends who are being pressured; secondly, a strong and sophisticated economic aid program and human rights program that offers a better life and a sharper alternative to the alternative offered by the totalitarians who oppose us; and finally, a strong diplomatic effort that pursues the possibilities of peace in the area.
Walter Mondale : That's one of the big disagreements that we have with the President -- that they have not pursued the diplomatic opportunities either within El Salvador or as between the countries and have lost time during which we might have been able to achieve a peace
Walter Mondale : This brings up the whole question of what Presidential leadership is all about.
Walter Mondale : I think the lesson in Central America, this recent embarrassment in Nicaragua where we are giving instructions for hired assassins, hiring criminals, and the rest -- all of this has strengthened our opponents.
Walter Mondale : A President must not only assure that we're tough, but we must also be wise and smart in the exercise of that power.
Walter Mondale : We saw the same thing in Lebanon, where we spent a good deal of America's assets.
Walter Mondale : But because the leadership of this government did not pursue wise policies, we have been humiliated, and our opponents are stronger.
Walter Mondale : The bottom line of national strength is that the President must be in command, he must lead.
Walter Mondale : And when a President doesn't know that submarine missiles are recallable, says that 70 percent of our strategic forces are conventional, discovers 3 years into his administration that our arms control efforts have failed because he didn't know that most Soviet missiles were on land -- these are things a President must know to command.
Walter Mondale : A President is called the Commander in Chief.
Walter Mondale : And he's called that because he's supposed to be in charge of the facts and run our government and strengthen our nation.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Mr. Mondale, if I could broaden the question just a little bit: Since World War II, every conflict that we as Americans have been involved with has been in non-conventional or irregular terms.
Georgie Anne Geyer : And yet, we keep fighting in conventional or traditional military terms.
Georgie Anne Geyer : The Central American wars are very much in the same pattern as China, as Lebanon, as Iran, as Cuba, in their early days.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Do you see any possibility that we are going to realize the change in warfare in our time, or react to it in those terms?
Walter Mondale : We absolutely must, which is why I responded to your first question the way I did.
Walter Mondale : It's much more complex.
Walter Mondale : You must understand the region; you must understand the politics in the area; you must provide a strong alternative; and you must show strength -- and all at the same time.
Walter Mondale : That's why I object to the covert action in Nicaragua.
Walter Mondale : That's a classic example of a strategy that's embarrassed us, strengthened our opposition, and undermined the moral authority of our people and our country in the region.
Walter Mondale : Strength requires knowledge, command.
Walter Mondale : We've seen in the Nicaraguan example a policy that has actually hurt us, strengthened our opposition, and undermined the moral authority of our country in that region.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Mr. President, in the last few months it has seemed more and more that your policies in Central America were beginning to work.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Yet, just at this moment, we are confronted with the extraordinary story of a CIA guerrilla manual for the anti-Sandinista contras whom we are backing, which advocates not only assassinations of Sandinistas but the hiring of criminals to assassinate the guerrillas we are supporting in order to create martyrs.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Is this not, in effect, our own state-supported terrorism?
Ronald Reagan : No, but I'm glad you asked that question, because I know it's on many peoples' minds.
Ronald Reagan : I have ordered an investigation.
Ronald Reagan : I know that the CIA is already going forward with one.
Ronald Reagan : We have a gentleman down in Nicaragua who is on contract to the CIA, advising -- supposedly on military tactics -- the contras.
Ronald Reagan : And he drew up this manual.
Ronald Reagan : It was turned over to the agency head of the CIA in Nicaragua to be printed.
Ronald Reagan : And a number of pages were excised by that agency head there, the man in charge, and he sent it on up here to CIA, where more pages were excised before it was printed.
Ronald Reagan : But some way or other, there were 12 of the original copies that got out down there and were not submitted for this printing process by the CIA.
Ronald Reagan : Now, those are the details as we have them.
Ronald Reagan : And as soon as we have an investigation and find out where any blame lies for the few that did not get excised or changed, we certainly are going to do something about that.
Ronald Reagan : We'll take the proper action at the proper time.
Ronald Reagan : I was very interested to hear about Central America and our process down there, and I thought for a moment that instead of a debate I was going to find Mr. Mondale in complete agreement with what we're doing, because the plan that he has outlined is the one we've been following for quite some time, including diplomatic processes throughout Central America and working closely with the Contadora group.
Ronald Reagan : So, I can only tell you about the manual -- that we're not in the habit of assigning guilt before there has been proper evidence produced and proof of that guilt.
Ronald Reagan : But if guilt is established, whoever is guilty we will treat with that situation then, and they will be removed.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Well, Mr. President, you are implying then that the CIA in Nicaragua is directing the contras there.
Georgie Anne Geyer : I'd also like to ask whether having the CIA investigate its own manual in such a sensitive area is not sort of like sending the fox into the chicken coop a second time?
Ronald Reagan : I'm afraid I misspoke when I said a CIA head in Nicaragua.
Ronald Reagan : There's not someone there directing all of this activity.
Ronald Reagan : There are, as you know, CIA men stationed in other countries in the world and, certainly, in Central America.
Ronald Reagan : And so it was a man down there in that area that this was delivered to, and he recognized that what was in that manual was in direct contravention of my own Executive order, in December of 1981, that we would have nothing to do with regard to political assassinations.
Edwin Newman : Mr. Mondale, your rebuttal.
Walter Mondale : What is a President charged with doing when he takes his oath of office?
Walter Mondale : He raises his right hand and takes an oath of office to take care to faithfully execute the laws of the land.
Walter Mondale : A President can't know everything, but a President has to know those things that are essential to his leadership and the enforcement of our laws.
Walter Mondale : This manual -- several thousands of which were produced -- was distributed, ordering political assassinations, hiring of criminals, and other forms of terrorism.
Walter Mondale : Some of it was excised, but the part dealing with political terrorism was continued.
Walter Mondale : How can this happen?
Walter Mondale : How can something this serious occur in an administration and have a President of the United States in a situation like this say he didn't know?
Walter Mondale : A President must know these things.
Walter Mondale : I don't know which is worse, not knowing or knowing and not stopping it.
Walter Mondale : And what about the mining of the harbors in Nicaragua which violated international law?
Walter Mondale : This has hurt this country, and a President's supposed to command.
Edwin Newman : Mr. President, your rebuttal.
Ronald Reagan : Yes.
Ronald Reagan : I have so many things there to respond to, I'm going to pick out something you said earlier.
Ronald Reagan : You've been all over the country repeating something that, I will admit, the press has also been repeating -- that I believed that nuclear missiles could be fired and then called back.
Ronald Reagan : I never, ever conceived of such a thing.
Ronald Reagan : I never said any such thing.
Ronald Reagan : In a discussion of our strategic arms negotiations, I said that submarines carrying missiles and airplanes carrying missiles were more conventional-type weapons, not as destabilizing as the land-based missiles, and that they were also weapons that -- or carriers -- that if they were sent out and there was a change, you could call them back before they had launched their missiles.
Ronald Reagan : But I hope that from here on you will no longer be saying that particular thing, which is absolutely false.
Ronald Reagan : How anyone could think that any sane person would believe you could call back a nuclear missile, I think is as ridiculous as the whole concept has been.
Ronald Reagan : So, thank you for giving me a chance to straighten the record.
Ronald Reagan : I'm sure that you appreciate that.
Ronald Reagan : [Laughter]
Edwin Newman : Mr. Kalb, your question to President Reagan.
Edwin Newman : Soviet Union
Marvin Kalb : Mr. President, you have often described the Soviet Union as a powerful, evil empire intent on world domination.
Marvin Kalb : But this year you have said, and I quote.
Marvin Kalb : """If they want to keep their Mickey Mouse system, that's okay with me.''"
Marvin Kalb : Which is it, Mr. President?
Marvin Kalb : Do you want to contain them within their present borders and perhaps try to reestablish detente -- or what goes for detente -- or do you really want to roll back their empire?
Ronald Reagan : I have said on a number of occasions exactly what I believe about the Soviet Union.
Ronald Reagan : I retract nothing that I have said.
Ronald Reagan : I believe that many of the things they have done are evil in any concept of morality that we have.
Ronald Reagan : But I also recognize that as the two great superpowers in the world, we have to live with each other.
Ronald Reagan : And I told Mr. Gromyko we don't like their system.
Ronald Reagan : They don't like ours.
Ronald Reagan : And we're not going to change their system, and they sure better not try to change ours.
Ronald Reagan : But between us, we can either destroy the world or we can save it.
Ronald Reagan : And I suggested that, certainly, it was to their common interest, along with ours, to avoid a conflict and to attempt to save the world and remove the nuclear weapons.
Ronald Reagan : And I think that perhaps we established a little better understanding.
Ronald Reagan : I think that in dealing with the Soviet Union one has to be realistic.
Ronald Reagan : I know that Mr. Mondale, in the past, has made statements as if they were just people like ourselves, and if we were kind and good and did something nice, they would respond accordingly.
Ronald Reagan : And the result was unilateral disarmament.
Ronald Reagan : We canceled the B - 1 under the previous administration.
Ronald Reagan : What did we get for it?
Ronald Reagan : Nothing.
Ronald Reagan : The Soviet Union has been engaged in the biggest military buildup in the history of man at the same time that we tried the policy of unilateral disarmament, of weakness, if you will.
Ronald Reagan : And now we are putting up a defense of our own.
Ronald Reagan : And I've made it very plain to them, we seek no superiority.
Ronald Reagan : We simply are going to provide a deterrent so that it will be too costly for them if they are nursing any ideas of aggression against us.
Ronald Reagan : Now, they claim they're not.
Ronald Reagan : And I made it plain to them, we're not.
Ronald Reagan : There's been no change in my attitude at all.
Ronald Reagan : I just thought when I came into office it was time that there was some realistic talk to and about the Soviet Union.
Ronald Reagan : And we did get their attention.
Ronald Reagan : Regions Vital to U.S.
Ronald Reagan : Interests
Marvin Kalb : Mr. President, perhaps the other side of the coin, a related question, sir.
Marvin Kalb : Since World War II, the vital interests of the United States have always been defined by treaty commitments and by Presidential proclamations.
Marvin Kalb : Aside from what is obvious, such as NATO, for example, which countries, which regions in the world do you regard as vital national interests of this country, meaning that you would send American troops to fight there if they were in danger?
Ronald Reagan : Ah, well, now you've added a hypothetical there at the end, Mr. Kalb, about where we would send troops in to fight.
Ronald Reagan : I am not going to make the decision as to what the tactics could be, but obviously there are a number of areas in the world that are of importance to us.
Ronald Reagan : One is the Middle East, and that is of interest to the whole Western World and the industrialized nations, because of the great supply of energy upon which so many depend there.
Ronald Reagan : Our neighbors here in America are vital to us.
Ronald Reagan : We're working right now in trying to be of help in southern Africa with regard to the independence of Namibia and the removal of the Cuban surrogates, the thousands of them, from Angola.
Ronald Reagan : So, I can say there are a great many interests.
Ronald Reagan : I believe that we have a great interest in the Pacific Basin.
Ronald Reagan : That is where I think the future of the world lies.
Ronald Reagan : "But I am not going to pick out one and, in advance, hypothetically say, ""Oh, yes, we would send troops there.''"
Ronald Reagan : I don't want to send troops any place.
Edwin Newman : I'm sorry, Mr. President.
Edwin Newman : Sir, your time was up.
Ronald Reagan : All right.
Ronald Reagan : Soviet Union
Marvin Kalb : "Mr. Mondale, you have described the Soviet leaders as, and I'm quoting, ""."
Marvin Kalb : 0
Marvin Kalb : 0
Marvin Kalb : cynical, ruthless, and dangerous,'' suggesting an almost total lack of trust in them.
Marvin Kalb : In that case, what makes you think that the annual summit meetings with them that you have proposed will result in agreements that would satisfy the interests of this country?
Walter Mondale : Because the only type of agreements to reach with the Soviet Union are the types that are specifically defined, so we know exactly what they must do; subject to full verification, which means we know every day whether they're living up to it; and followups, wherever we find suggestions that they're violating it; and the strongest possible terms.
Walter Mondale : I have no illusions about the Soviet Union leadership or the nature of that state.
Walter Mondale : They are a tough and a ruthless adversary, and we must be prepared to meet that challenge, and I would.
Walter Mondale : Where I part with the President is that despite all of those differences we must, as past Presidents before this one have done, meet on the common ground of survival.
Walter Mondale : And that's where the President has opposed practically every arms control agreement, by every President, of both political parties, since the bomb went off.
Walter Mondale : And he now completes this term with no progress toward arms control at all, but with a very dangerous arms race underway instead.
Walter Mondale : There are now over 2,000 more warheads pointed at us today than there were when he was sworn in, and that does not strengthen us.
Walter Mondale : We must be very, very realistic in the nature of that leadership, but we must grind away and talk to find ways of reducing these differences, particularly where arms races are concerned and other dangerous exercises of Soviet power.
Walter Mondale : There will be no unilateral disarmament under my administration.
Walter Mondale : I will keep this nation strong.
Walter Mondale : I understand exactly what the Soviets are up to, but that, too, is a part of national strength.
Walter Mondale : To do that, a President must know what is essential to command and to leadership and to strength.
Walter Mondale : And that's where the President's failure to master, in my opinion, the essential elements of arms control has cost us dearly.
Walter Mondale : He's 3 years into this administration.
Walter Mondale : He said he just discovered that most Soviet missiles are on land, and that's why his proposal didn't work.
Walter Mondale : I invite the American people tomorrow -- because I will issue the statement quoting President Reagan -- he said exactly what I said he said.
Walter Mondale : He said that these missiles were less dangerous than ballistic missiles because you could fire them, and you could recall them if you decided there'd been a miscalculation.
Edwin Newman : I'm sorry, sir -- --
Walter Mondale : A President must know those things.
Walter Mondale : Eastern Europe
Marvin Kalb : A related question, Mr. Mondale, on Eastern Europe.
Marvin Kalb : Do you accept the conventional diplomatic wisdom that Eastern Europe is a Soviet sphere of influence?
Marvin Kalb : And if you do, what could a Mondale administration realistically do to help the people of Eastern Europe achieve the human rights that were guaranteed to them as a result of the Helsinki accords?
Walter Mondale : I think the essential strategy of the United States ought not accept any Soviet control over Eastern Europe.
Walter Mondale : We ought to deal with each of these countries separately.
Walter Mondale : We ought to pursue strategies with each of them, economic and the rest, that help them pull away from their dependence upon the Soviet Union.
Walter Mondale : Where the Soviet Union has acted irresponsibly, as they have in many of those countries, especially, recently, in Poland, I believe we ought to insist that Western credits extended to the Soviet Union bear the market rate.
Walter Mondale : Make the Soviets pay for their irresponsibility.
Walter Mondale : That is a very important objective -- to make certain that we continue to look forward to progress toward greater independence by these nations and work with each of them separately.
Edwin Newman : Mr. President, your rebuttal.
Ronald Reagan : Yes.
Ronald Reagan : I'm not going to continue trying to respond to these repetitions of the falsehoods that have already been stated here.
Ronald Reagan : But with regard to whether Mr. Mondale would be strong, as he said he would be, I know that he has a commercial out where he's appearing on the deck of the Nimitz and watching the F - 14's take off.
Ronald Reagan : And that's an image of strength -- except that if he had had his way when the Nimitz was being planned, he would have been deep in the water out there because there wouldn't have been any Nimitz to stand on -- he was against it.
Ronald Reagan : [Laughter]
Ronald Reagan : He was against the F - 14 fighter, he was against the M - 1 tank, he was against the B - 1 bomber, he wanted to cut the salary of all of the military, he wanted to bring home half of the American forces in Europe.
Ronald Reagan : And he has a record of weakness with regard to our national defense that is second to none.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Hear, hear!
Ronald Reagan : Indeed, he was on that side virtually throughout all his years in the Senate.
Ronald Reagan : And he opposed even President Carter, when toward the end of his term President Carter wanted to increase the defense budget.
Edwin Newman : Mr. Mondale, your rebuttal.
Walter Mondale : Mr. President, I accept your commitment to peace, but I want you to accept my commitment to a strong national defense.
Walter Mondale : [Applause] I propose a budget -- I have proposed a budget which would increase our nation's strength, in real terms, by double that of the Soviet Union.
Walter Mondale : I'll tell you where we disagree.
Walter Mondale : It is true over 10 years ago I voted to delay production of the F - 14, and I'll tell you why.
Walter Mondale : The plane wasn't flying the way it was supposed to be; it was a waste of money.
Walter Mondale : Your definition of national strength is to throw money at the Defense Department.
Walter Mondale : My definition of national strength is to make certain that a dollar spent buys us a dollar's worth of defense.
Walter Mondale : There's a big difference between the two of us.
Walter Mondale : A President must manage that budget.
Walter Mondale : I will keep us strong, but you'll not do that unless you command that budget and make certain we get the strength that we need.
Walter Mondale : You pay $500 for a $5 hammer, you're not buying strength.
Edwin Newman : I would ask the audience not to applaud.
Edwin Newman : All it does is take up time that we would like to devote to the debate.
Edwin Newman : Mr. Kondracke, your question to Mr. Mondale.
Edwin Newman : Use of Military Force
Morton Kondracke : "Mr. Mondale, in an address earlier this year you said that before this country resorts to military force, and I'm quoting, ""American interests should be sharply defined, publicly supported, congressionally sanctioned, militarily feasible, internationally defensible, open to independent scrutiny, and alert to regional history.''"
Morton Kondracke : Now, aren't you setting up such a gauntlet of tests here that adversaries could easily suspect that as President you would never use force to protect American interests?
Walter Mondale : No.
Walter Mondale : As a matter of fact, I believe every one of those standards is essential to the exercise of power by this country.
Walter Mondale : And we can see that in both Lebanon and in Central America.
Walter Mondale : In Lebanon, this President exercised American power, all right, but the management of it was such that our marines were killed, we had to leave in humiliation, the Soviet Union became stronger, terrorists became emboldened.
Walter Mondale : And it was because they did not think through how power should be exercised, did not have the American public with them on a plan that worked, that we ended up the way we did.
Walter Mondale : Similarly, in Central America: What we're doing in Nicaragua with this covert war -- which the Congress, including many Republicans, have tried to stop -- is finally end up with a public definition of American power that hurts us, where we get associated with political assassins and the rest.
Walter Mondale : We have to decline, for the first time in modern history, jurisdiction in the World Court because they'll find us guilty of illegal actions.
Walter Mondale : And our enemies are strengthened from all of this.
Walter Mondale : We need to be strong, we need to be prepared to use that strength, but we must understand that we are a democracy.
Walter Mondale : We are a government by the people, and when we move, it should be for very severe and extreme reasons that serve our national interests and end up with a stronger country behind us.
Walter Mondale : It is only in that way that we can persevere.
Walter Mondale : Nicaragua
Morton Kondracke : You've been quoted as saying that you might quarantine Nicaragua.
Morton Kondracke : I'd like to know what that means.
Morton Kondracke : Would you stop Soviet ships, as President Kennedy did in 1962?
Morton Kondracke : And wouldn't that be more dangerous than President Reagan's covert war?
Walter Mondale : What I'm referring to there is the mutual self-defense provisions that exist in the Inter-American treaty, the so-called Rio Pact, that permits the nations, our friends in that region, to combine to take steps -- diplomatic and otherwise -- to prevent Nicaragua, when she acts irresponsibly in asserting power in other parts outside of her border, to take those steps, whatever they might be, to stop it.
Walter Mondale : The Nicaraguans must know that it is the policy of our government that that leadership must stay behind the boundaries of their nation, not interfere in other nations.
Walter Mondale : And by working with all of the nations in the region -- unlike the policies of this administration and unlike the President said, they have not supported negotiations in that region -- we will be much stronger, because we'll have the moral authority that goes with those efforts.
Walter Mondale : Lebanon
Morton Kondracke : President Reagan, you introduced U.S. forces into Lebanon as neutral peacekeepers, but then you made them combatants on the side of the Lebanese Government.
Morton Kondracke : Eventually you were forced to withdraw them under fire, and now Syria, a Soviet ally, is dominant in the country.
Morton Kondracke : Doesn't Lebanon represent a major failure on the part of your administration and raise serious questions about your capacity as a foreign policy strategist and as Commander in Chief?
Ronald Reagan : No, Morton, I don't agree to all of those things.
Ronald Reagan : First of all, when we and our allies -- the Italians, the French, and the United Kingdom -- went into Lebanon, we went in there at the request of what was left of the Lebanese Government to be a stabilizing force while they tried to establish a government.
Ronald Reagan : But the first -- pardon me -- the first time we went in, we went in at their request because the war was going on right in Beirut between Israel and the PLO terrorists.
Ronald Reagan : Israel could not be blamed for that.
Ronald Reagan : Those terrorists had been violating their northern border consistently, and Israel chased them all the way to there.
Ronald Reagan : Then we went in with the multinational force to help remove, and did remove, more than 13,000 of those terrorists from Lebanon.
Ronald Reagan : We departed.
Ronald Reagan : And then the Government of Lebanon asked us back in as a stabilizing force while they established a government and sought to get the foreign forces all the way out of Lebanon and that they could then take care of their own borders.
Ronald Reagan : And we were succeeding.
Ronald Reagan : We were there for the better part of a year.
Ronald Reagan : Our position happened to be at the airport.
Ronald Reagan : Oh, there were occasional snipings and sometimes some artillery fire, but we did not engage in conflict that was out of line with our mission.
Ronald Reagan : I will never send troops anywhere on a mission of that kind without telling them that if somebody shoots at them, they can darn well shoot back.
Ronald Reagan : And this is what we did.
Ronald Reagan : We never initiated any kind of action; we defended ourselves there.
Ronald Reagan : But we were succeeding to the point that the Lebanese Government had been organized -- if you will remember, there were the meetings in Geneva in which they began to meet with the hostile factional forces and try to put together some kind of a peace plan.
Ronald Reagan : We were succeeding, and that was why the terrorist acts began.
Ronald Reagan : There are forces there -- and that includes Syria, in my mind -- who don't want us to succeed, who don't want that kind of a peace with a dominant Lebanon, dominant over its own territory.
Ronald Reagan : And so, the terrorist acts began and led to the one great tragedy when they were killed in that suicide bombing of the building.
Ronald Reagan : Then the multilateral force withdrew for only one reason: We withdrew because we were no longer able to carry out the mission for which we had been sent in.
Ronald Reagan : But we went in in the interest of peace and to keep Israel and Syria from getting into the sixth war between them.
Ronald Reagan : And I have no apologies for our going on a peace mission.
Morton Kondracke : Mr. President, 4 years ago you criticized President Carter for ignoring ample warnings that our diplomats in Iran might be taken hostage.
Morton Kondracke : Haven't you done exactly the same thing in Lebanon, not once, but three times, with 300 Americans, not hostages, but dead?
Morton Kondracke : And you vowed swift retaliation against terrorists, but doesn't our lack of response suggest that you're just bluffing?
Ronald Reagan : Morton, no.
Ronald Reagan : I think there's a great difference between the Government of Iran threatening our diplomatic personnel, and there is a government that you can see and can put your hand on.
Ronald Reagan : In the terrorist situation, there are terrorist factions all over.
Ronald Reagan : In a recent 30-day period, 37 terrorist acts in 20 countries have been committed.
Ronald Reagan : The most recent has been the one in Brighton.
Ronald Reagan : In dealing with terrorists, yes, we want to retaliate, but only if we can put our finger on the people responsible and not endanger the lives of innocent civilians there in the various communities and in the city of Beirut where these terrorists are operating.
Ronald Reagan : I have just signed legislation to add to our ability to deal, along with our allies, with this terrorist problem.
Ronald Reagan : And it's going to take all the nations together, just as when we banded together we pretty much resolved the whole problem of skyjackings sometime ago.
Ronald Reagan : Well, the red light went on.
Ronald Reagan : I could have gone on forever.
Edwin Newman : Mr. Mondale, your rebuttal?
Walter Mondale : "Groucho Marx said, ""Who do you believe?"
Walter Mondale : -- me, or your own eyes?''
Walter Mondale : And what we have in Lebanon is something that the American people have seen.
Walter Mondale : The Joint Chiefs urged the President not to put our troops in that barracks because they were indefensible.
Walter Mondale : "They went to him 5 days before they were killed and said, ""Please, take them out of there.''"
Walter Mondale : The Secretary of State admitted that this morning.
Walter Mondale : He did not do so.
Walter Mondale : The report following the explosion of the barracks disclosed that we had not taken any of the steps that we should have taken.
Walter Mondale : That was the second time.
Walter Mondale : Then the Embassy was blown up a few weeks ago, and once again none of the steps that should have been taken were taken.
Walter Mondale : And we were warned 5 days before that explosives were on their way, and they weren't taken.
Walter Mondale : The terrorists have won each time.
Walter Mondale : The President told the terrorists he was going to retaliate.
Walter Mondale : He didn't.
Walter Mondale : They called their bluff.
Walter Mondale : And the bottom line is that the United States left in humiliation, and our enemies are stronger.
Edwin Newman : Mr. President, your rebuttal?
Ronald Reagan : Yes.
Ronald Reagan : First of all, Mr. Mondale should know that the President of the United States did not order the marines into that barracks.
Ronald Reagan : That was a command decision made by the commanders on the spot and based with what they thought was best for the men there.
Ronald Reagan : That is one.
Ronald Reagan : On the other things that you've just said about the terrorists, I'm tempted to ask you what you would do.
Ronald Reagan : These are unidentified people, and after the bomb goes off, they're blown to bits because they are suicidal individuals who think they're going to go to paradise if they perpetrate such an act and lose their life in doing it.
Ronald Reagan : We are going to, as I say, we're busy trying to find the centers where these operations stem from, and retaliation will be taken.
Ronald Reagan : "But we're not going to simply kill some people to say, ""Oh, look, we got even.''"
Ronald Reagan : We want to know when we retaliate that we're retaliating with those who are responsible for the terrorist acts.
Ronald Reagan : And terrorist acts are such that our own United States Capitol in Washington has been bombed twice.
Edwin Newman : Mr. Trewhitt, your question to President Reagan?
Edwin Newman : The President's Age
Edwin Newman : Mr. Trewhitt.
Edwin Newman : Mr. President, I want to raise an issue that I think has been lurking out there for 2 or 3 weeks and cast it specifically in national security terms.
Edwin Newman : You already are the oldest President in history.
Edwin Newman : And some of your staff say you were tired after your most recent encounter with Mr. Mondale.
Edwin Newman : I recall yet that President Kennedy had to go for days on end with very little sleep during the Cuban missile crisis.
Edwin Newman : Is there any doubt in your mind that you would be able to function in such circumstances?
Ronald Reagan : Not at all, Mr. Trewhitt, and I want you to know that also I will not make age an issue of this campaign.
Ronald Reagan : I am not going to exploit, for political purposes, my opponent's youth and inexperience.
Ronald Reagan : "[Laughter and applause] If I still have time, I might add, Mr. Trewhitt, I might add that it was Seneca or it was Cicero, I don't know which, that said, ""If it was not for the elders correcting the mistakes of the young, there would be no state.''"
Ronald Reagan : Strategic Missiles
Ronald Reagan : Mr. Trewhitt.
Ronald Reagan : Mr. President, I'd like to head for the fence and try to catch that one before it goes over, but I'll go on to another question.
Ronald Reagan : You and Mr. Mondale have already disagreed about what you had to say about recalling submarine-launched missiles.
Ronald Reagan : There's another, a similar issue out there that relates to your -- it is said, at least, that you were unaware that the Soviet retaliatory power was based on land-based missiles.
Ronald Reagan : First, is that correct?
Ronald Reagan : Secondly, if it is correct, have you informed yourself in the meantime?
Ronald Reagan : And third, is it even necessary for the President to be so intimately involved in strategic details?
Ronald Reagan : Yes, this had to do with our disarmament talks.
Ronald Reagan : And the whole controversy about land missiles came up because we thought that the strategic nuclear weapons, the most destabilizing are the land-based.
Ronald Reagan : You put your thumb on a button and somebody blows up 20 minutes later.
Ronald Reagan : So, we thought that it would be simpler to negotiate first with those.
Ronald Reagan : And then we made it plain, a second phase, take up the submarine-launched or the airborne missiles.
Ronald Reagan : The Soviet Union, to our surprise -- and not just mine -- made it plain when we brought this up that they placed, they thought, a greater reliance on the land-based missiles and, therefore, they wanted to take up all three.
Ronald Reagan : And we agreed.
Ronald Reagan : "We said, ""All right, if that's what you want to do.''"
Ronald Reagan : But it was a surprise to us, because they outnumbered us 64 to 36 in submarines and 20 percent more bombers capable of carrying nuclear missiles than we had.
Ronald Reagan : So, why should we believe that they had placed that much more reliance on land-based?
Ronald Reagan : "But even after we gave in and said, ""All right, let's discuss it all,'' they walked away from the table."
Ronald Reagan : We didn't.
Ronald Reagan : The President's Age
Ronald Reagan : Mr. Trewhitt.
Ronald Reagan : Mr. Mondale, I'm going to hang in there.
Ronald Reagan : Should the President's age and stamina be an issue in the political campaign?
Walter Mondale : No.
Walter Mondale : And I have not made it an issue, nor should it be.
Walter Mondale : What's at issue here is the President's application of his authority to understand what a President must know to lead this nation, secure our defense, and make the decisions and the judgments that are necessary.
Walter Mondale : A minute ago the President quoted Cicero, I believe.
Walter Mondale : I want to quote somebody a little closer to home, Harry Truman.
Walter Mondale : "He said, ""The buck stops here.''"
Walter Mondale : We just heard the President's answer for the problems at the barracks in Lebanon, where 241 marines were killed.
Walter Mondale : What happened?
Walter Mondale : "First, the Joint Chiefs of Staff went to the President, said, ""Don't put those troops there.''"
Walter Mondale : They did it.
Walter Mondale : "And then 5 days before the troops were killed, they went back to the President, through the Secretary of Defense, and said, ""Please, Mr. President, take those troops out of there because we can't defend them.''"
Walter Mondale : They didn't do it.
Walter Mondale : And we know what happened.
Walter Mondale : After that, once again, our Embassy was exploded.
Walter Mondale : This is the fourth time this has happened -- an identical attack, in the same region, despite warnings -- even public warnings -- from the terrorists.
Walter Mondale : Who's in charge?
Walter Mondale : Who's handling this matter?
Walter Mondale : That's my main point.
Walter Mondale : Now, on arms control, we're completing 4 years.
Walter Mondale : This is the first administration since the bomb went off that made no progress.
Walter Mondale : We have an arms race underway instead.
Walter Mondale : A President has to lead his government or it won't be done.
Walter Mondale : Different people with different views fight with each other.
Walter Mondale : For 31/2 years, this administration avoided arms control, resisted tabling arms control proposals that had any hope of agreeing, rebuked their negotiator in 1981 when he came close to an agreement, at least in principle, on medium-range weapons.
Walter Mondale : And we have this arms race underway.
Walter Mondale : "And a recent book that just came out by perhaps the Nation's most respected author in this field, Strobe Talbott, called ""Deadly Gambits,'' concludes that this President has failed to master the essential details needed to command and lead us, both in terms of security and terms of arms control."
Walter Mondale : That's why they call the President the Commander in Chief.
Walter Mondale : Good intentions, I grant.
Walter Mondale : But it takes more than that.
Walter Mondale : You must be tough and smart.
Walter Mondale : The President's Leadership
Walter Mondale : Mr. Trewhitt.
Walter Mondale : This question of leadership keeps arising in different forms in this discussion already.
Walter Mondale : And the President, Mr. Mondale, has called you whining and vacillating, among the more charitable phrases -- weak, I believe.
Walter Mondale : It is a question of leadership.
Walter Mondale : And he has made the point that you have not repudiated some of the semidiplomatic activity of the Reverend Jackson, particularly in Central America.
Walter Mondale : Did you approve of his diplomatic activity?
Walter Mondale : And are you prepared to repudiate him now?
Walter Mondale : I read his statement the other day.
Walter Mondale : I don't admire Fidel Castro at all.
Walter Mondale : And I've said that.
Walter Mondale : Che Guevara was a contemptible figure in civilization's history.
Walter Mondale : I know the Cuban state as a police state, and all my life I've worked in a way that demonstrates that.
Walter Mondale : But Jesse Jackson is an independent person.
Walter Mondale : I don't control him.
Walter Mondale : And let's talk about people we do control.
Walter Mondale : In the last debate,1 (FOOTNOTE) the Vice President of the United States said that I said the marines had died shamefully and died in shame in Lebanon.
Walter Mondale : I demanded an apology from Vice President Bush because I had, instead, honored these young men, grieved for their families, and think they were wonderful Americans that honored us all.
Walter Mondale : What does the President have to say about taking responsibility for a Vice President who won't apologize for something like that?
Walter Mondale : (FOOTNOTE) 1Mr.
Walter Mondale : Mondale was referring to an earlier debate between George Bush and Geraldine Ferarro, the Vice-Presidential candidates.
Edwin Newman : Mr. President, your rebuttal?
Ronald Reagan : Yes.
Ronald Reagan : I know it'll come as a surprise to Mr. Mondale, but I am in charge.
Ronald Reagan : And, as a matter of fact, we haven't avoided arms control talks with the Soviet Union.
Ronald Reagan : Very early in my administration I proposed -- and I think something that had never been proposed by any previous administration -- I proposed a total elimination of intermediate-range missiles, where the Soviets had better than a 10 -- and still have -- better than a 10-to-1 advantage over the allies in Europe.
Ronald Reagan : When they protested that and suggested a smaller number, perhaps, I went along with that.
Ronald Reagan : The so-called negotiation that you said I walked out on was the so-called walk in the woods between one of our representatives and one of the Soviet Union, and it wasn't me that turned it down, the Soviet Union disavowed it.
Edwin Newman : Mr. Mondale, your rebuttal?
Walter Mondale : There are two distinguished authors on arms control in this country -- there are many others, but two that I want to cite tonight.
Walter Mondale : "One is Strobe Talbott in his classic book, ""Deadly Gambits.''"
Walter Mondale : The other is John Neuhaus, who's one of the most distinguished arms control specialists in our country.
Walter Mondale : "Both said that this administration turned down the ""walk in the woods'' agreement first, and that would have been a perfect agreement from the standpoint of the United States in Europe and our security."
Walter Mondale : When Mr. Nitze, a good negotiator, returned, he was rebuked, and his boss was fired.
Walter Mondale : This is the kind of leadership that we've had in this administration on the most deadly issue of our times.
Walter Mondale : Now we have a runaway arms race.
Walter Mondale : All they've got to show for 4 years in U.S.-Soviet relations is one meeting in the last weeks of an administration, and nothing before.
Walter Mondale : They're tough negotiators, but all previous Presidents have made progress.
Walter Mondale : This one has not.
Edwin Newman : Ms. Geyer, your question to Mr. Mondale.
Edwin Newman : Illegal Immigration
Georgie Anne Geyer : Mr. Mondale, many analysts are now saying that actually our number one foreign policy problem today is one that remains almost totally unrecognized: massive illegal immigration from economically collapsing countries.
Georgie Anne Geyer : They are saying that it is the only real territorial threat to the American nation-state.
Georgie Anne Geyer : "You, yourself, said in the 1970's that we had a ""hemorrhage on our borders.''"
Georgie Anne Geyer : Yet today you have backed off any immigration reform, such as the balanced and highly crafted Simpson-Mazzoli bill.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Why?
Georgie Anne Geyer : What would you do instead today, if anything?
Walter Mondale : This is a very serious problem in our country, and it has to be dealt with.
Walter Mondale : I object to that part of the Simpson-Mazzoli bill which I think is very unfair and would prove to be so.
Walter Mondale : That is the part that requires employers to determine the citizenship of an employee before they're hired.
Walter Mondale : I'm convinced that the result of this would be that people who are Hispanic, people who have different languages or speak with an accent, would find it difficult to be employed.
Walter Mondale : I think that's wrong.
Walter Mondale : We've never had citizenship tests in our country before, and I don't think we should have a citizenship card today.
Walter Mondale : That is counterproductive.
Walter Mondale : I do support the other aspects of the Simpson-Mazzoli bill that strengthen enforcement at the border, strengthen other ways of dealing with undocumented workers in this difficult area and dealing with the problem of settling people who have lived here for many, many years and do not have an established status.
Walter Mondale : I have further strongly recommended that this administration do something it has not done, and that is to strengthen enforcement at the border, strengthen the officials in this government that deal with undocumented workers, and to do so in a way that's responsible and within the Constitution of the United States.
Walter Mondale : We need an answer to this problem, but it must be an American answer that is consistent with justice and due process.
Walter Mondale : Everyone in this room, practically, here tonight, is an immigrant.
Walter Mondale : We came here loving this nation, serving it, and it has served all of our most bountiful dreams.
Walter Mondale : And one of those dreams is justice.
Walter Mondale : And we need a measure -- and I will support a measure -- that brings about those objectives but avoids that one aspect that I think is very serious.
Walter Mondale : The second part is to maintain and improve relations with our friends to the south.
Walter Mondale : We cannot solve this problem all on our own.
Walter Mondale : And that's why the failure of this administration to deal in an effective and a good-faith way with Mexico, with Costa Rica, with the other nations in trying to find a peaceful settlement to the dispute in Central America has undermined our capacity to effectively deal diplomatically in this area as well.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Sir, people as well-balanced and just as Father Theodore Hesburgh at Notre Dame, who headed the select commission on immigration, have pointed out repeatedly that there will be no immigration reform without employer sanctions, because it would be an unbalanced bill, and there would be simply no way to enforce it.
Georgie Anne Geyer : However, putting that aside for the moment, your critics have also said repeatedly that you have not gone along with the bill or with any immigration reform because of the Hispanic groups -- or Hispanic leadership groups -- who actually do not represent what the Hispanic-Americans want, because polls show that they overwhelmingly want some kind of immigration reform.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Can you say, or how can you justify your position on this?
Georgie Anne Geyer : And how do you respond to the criticism that this is another, or that this is an example of your flip-flopping and giving in to special interest groups at the expense of the American nation?
Walter Mondale : I think you're right that the polls show that the majority of Hispanics want that bill, so I'm not doing it for political reasons.
Walter Mondale : I'm doing it because all my life I've fought for a system of justice in this country, a system in which every American has a chance to achieve the fullness in life without discrimination.
Walter Mondale : This bill imposes upon employers the responsibility of determining whether somebody who applies for a job is an American or not.
Walter Mondale : And just inevitably, they're going to be reluctant to hire Hispanics or people with a different accent.
Walter Mondale : If I were dealing with politics here, the polls show the American people want this.
Walter Mondale : I am for reform in this area, for tough enforcement at the border, and for many other aspects of the Simpson-Mazzoli bill, but all my life I've fought for a fair nation.
Walter Mondale : And despite the politics of it, I stand where I stand, and I think I'm right, and before this fight is over we're going to come up with a better bill, a more effective bill that does not undermine the liberties of our people.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Mr. President, you, too, have said that our borders are out of control.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Yet this fall you allowed the Simpson-Mazzoli bill -- which would at least have minimally protected our borders and the rights of citizenship -- because of a relatively unimportant issue of reimbursement to the States for legalized aliens.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Given that, may I ask what priority can we expect you to give this forgotten national security element?
Georgie Anne Geyer : How sincere are you in your efforts to control, in effect, the nation-state that is the United States?
Ronald Reagan : Georgie Anne, we, believe me, supported the Simpson-Mazzoli bill strongly -- and the bill that came out of the Senate.
Ronald Reagan : However, there were things added in in the House side that we felt made it less of a good bill; as a matter of fact, made it a bad bill.
Ronald Reagan : And in conference -- we stayed with them in conference all the way to where even Senator Simpson did not want the bill in the manner in which it would come out of the conference committee.
Ronald Reagan : There were a number of things in there that weakened that bill.
Ronald Reagan : I can't go into detail about them here.
Ronald Reagan : But it is true our borders are out of control.
Ronald Reagan : It is also true that this has been a situation on our borders back through a number of administrations.
Ronald Reagan : And I supported this bill.
Ronald Reagan : I believe in the idea of amnesty for those who have put down roots and who have lived here even though sometime back they may have entered illegally.
Ronald Reagan : With regard to the employer sanctions, we must have that not only to ensure that we can identify the illegal aliens, but also, while some keep protesting about what it would do to employers, there is another employer that we shouldn't be so concerned about, and these are employers down through the years who have encouraged the illegal entry into this country because they then hire these individuals and hire them at starvation wages and with none of the benefits that we think are normal and natural for workers in our country, and the individuals can't complain because of their illegal status.
Ronald Reagan : We don't think that those people should be allowed to continue operating free.
Ronald Reagan : And this was why the provisions that we had in with regard to sanctions, and so forth -- and I'm going to do everything I can, and all of us in the administration are, to join in again when Congress is back at it to get an immigration bill that will give us, once again, control of our borders.
Ronald Reagan : And with regard to friendship below the border and with the countries down there, yes, no administration that I know has established the relationship that we have with our Latin friends.
Ronald Reagan : But as long as they have an economy that leaves so many people in dire poverty and unemployment, they are going to seek that employment across our borders.
Ronald Reagan : And we work with those other countries.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Mr. President, the experts also say that the situation today is terribly different quantitatively -- qualitatively different from what it has been in the past because of the gigantic population growth.
Georgie Anne Geyer : For instance, Mexico's population will go from about 60 million today to 120 million at the turn of the century.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Many of these people will be coming into the United States not as citizens, but as illegal workers.
Georgie Anne Geyer : You have repeatedly said recently that you believe that Armageddon, the destruction of the world, may be imminent in our times.
Georgie Anne Geyer : Do you ever feel that we are in for an Armageddon or a situation, a time of anarchy, regarding the population explosion in the world?
Ronald Reagan : No.
Ronald Reagan : As a matter of fact, the population explosion, if you look at the actual figures, has been vastly exaggerated -- over exaggerated.
Ronald Reagan : As a matter of fact, there are some pretty scientific and solid figures about how much space there still is in the world and how many more people we can have.
Ronald Reagan : It's almost like going back to the Malthusian theory, when even then they were saying that everyone would starve with the limited population they had then.
Ronald Reagan : But the problem of population growth is one, here, with regard to our immigration.
Ronald Reagan : And we have been the safety valve, whether we wanted to or not, with the illegal entry here, in Mexico, where their population is increasing and they don't have an economy that can absorb them and provide the jobs.
Ronald Reagan : And this is what we're trying to work out, not only to protect our own borders but to have some kind of fairness and recognition of that problem.
Edwin Newman : Mr. Mondale, your rebuttal?
Walter Mondale : One of the biggest problems today is that the countries to our south are so desperately poor that these people who will almost lose their lives if they don't come north, come north despite all the risks.
Walter Mondale : And if we're going to find a permanent, fundamental answer to this, it goes to American economic and trade policies that permit these nations to have a chance to get on their own two feet and to get prosperity, so that they can have jobs for themselves and their people.
Walter Mondale : And that's why this enormous national debt, engineered by this administration, is harming these countries in fueling this immigration.
Walter Mondale : These high interest rates -- real rates that have doubled under this administration -- have had the same effect on Mexico and so on, and the cost of repaying those debts is so enormous that it results in massive unemployment, hardship, and heartache.
Walter Mondale : And that drives our friends to the south up into our region, and we need to end those deficits as well.
Edwin Newman : Mr. President, your rebuttal.
Ronald Reagan : Well, my rebuttal is I've heard the national debt blamed for a lot of things, but not for illegal immigration across our border -- [laughter] -- and it has nothing to do with it.
Ronald Reagan : But with regard to these high interest rates, too, at least give us the recognition of the fact that when you left office, Mr. Mondale, they were 211/2 -- the prime rate.
Ronald Reagan : It's now 121/4, and I predict it'll be coming down a little more shortly.
Ronald Reagan : So, we're trying to undo some of the things that your administration did.
Ronald Reagan : [Applause]
Edwin Newman : No applause, please.
Edwin Newman : Mr. Kalb, your question to President Reagan.
Edwin Newman : Armageddon
Marvin Kalb : Mr. President, I'd like to pick up this Armageddon theme.
Marvin Kalb : You've been quoted as saying that you do believe, deep down, that we are heading for some kind of biblical Armageddon.
Marvin Kalb : Your Pentagon and your Secretary of Defense have plans for the United States to fight and prevail in a nuclear war.
Marvin Kalb : Do you feel that we are now heading perhaps, for some kind of nuclear Armageddon?
Marvin Kalb : And do you feel that this country and the world could survive that kind of calamity?
Ronald Reagan : Mr. Kalb, I think what has been hailed as something I'm supposedly, as President, discussing as principle is the recall of just some philosophical discussions with people who are interested in the same things; and that is the prophecies down through the years, the biblical prophecies of what would portend the coming of Armageddon, and so forth, and the fact that a number of theologians for the last decade or more have believed that this was true, that the prophecies are coming together that portend that.
Ronald Reagan : But no one knows whether Armageddon, those prophecies mean that Armageddon is a thousand years away or day after tomorrow.
Ronald Reagan : So, I have never seriously warned and said we must plan according to Armageddon.
Ronald Reagan : Now, with regard to having to say whether we would try to survive in the event of a nuclear war, of course we would.
Ronald Reagan : But let me also point out that to several parliaments around the world, in Europe and in Asia, I have made a statement to each one of them, and I'll repeat it here: A nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought.
Ronald Reagan : And that is why we are maintaining a deterrent and trying to achieve a deterrent capacity to where no one would believe that they could start such a war and escape with limited damage.
Ronald Reagan : But the deterrent -- and that's what it is for -- is also what led me to propose what is now being called the Star Wars concept, but propose that we research to see if there isn't a defensive weapon that could defend against incoming missiles.
Ronald Reagan : And if such a defense could be found, wouldn't it be far more humanitarian to say that now we can defend against a nuclear war by destroying missiles instead of slaughtering millions of people?
Ronald Reagan : Strategic Defense Initiative
Marvin Kalb : Mr. President, when you made that proposal, the so-called Star Wars proposal, you said, if I'm not mistaken, that you would share this very super-sophisticated technology with the Soviet Union.
Marvin Kalb : After all of the distrust over the years, sir, that you have expressed towards the Soviet Union, do you really expect anyone to take seriously that offer that you would share the best of America's technology in this weapons area with our principal adversary?
Ronald Reagan : Why not?
Ronald Reagan : What if we did -- and I hope we can; we're still researching -- what if we come up with a weapon that renders those missiles obsolete?
Ronald Reagan : There has never been a weapon invented in the history of man that has not led to a defensive, a counterweapon.
Ronald Reagan : But suppose we came up with that?
Ronald Reagan : "Now, some people have said, ""Ah, that would make war imminent, because they would think that we could launch a first strike because we could defend against the enemy.''"
Ronald Reagan : But why not do what I have offered to do and asked the Soviet Union to do?
Ronald Reagan : "Say, ""Look, here's what we can do."
Ronald Reagan : We'll even give it to you.
Ronald Reagan : Now, will you sit down with us and once and for all get rid, all of us, of these nuclear weapons and free mankind from that threat?''
Ronald Reagan : I think that would be the greatest use of a defensive weapon.
Marvin Kalb : Mr. Mondale, you've been very sharply critical of the President's Strategic Defense Initiative.
Marvin Kalb : And yet, what is wrong with a major effort by this country to try to use its best technology to knock out as many incoming nuclear warheads as possible?
Walter Mondale : First of all, let me sharply disagree with the President on sharing the most advanced, the most dangerous, the most important technology in America with the Soviet Union.
Walter Mondale : We have had for many years, understandably, a system of restraints on high technology because the Soviets are behind us.
Walter Mondale : And any research or development along the Star Wars schemes would inevitably involve our most advanced computers, our most advanced engineering.
Walter Mondale : And the thought that we would share this with the Soviet Union is, in my opinion, a total non-STARTer.
Walter Mondale : I would not let the Soviet Union get their hands on it at all.
Walter Mondale : Now, what's wrong with Star Wars?
Walter Mondale : There's nothing wrong with the theory of it.
Walter Mondale : If we could develop a principle that would say both sides could fire all their missiles and no one would get hurt, I suppose it's a good idea.
Walter Mondale : But the fact of it is we're so far away from research that even comes close to that, that the Director of Engineering Research at the Defense Department said to get there we would have to solve eight problems, each of which are more difficult than the atomic bomb and the Manhattan project.
Walter Mondale : It would cost something like a trillion dollars to test and deploy weapons.
Walter Mondale : The second thing is this all assumes that the Soviets wouldn't respond in kind.
Walter Mondale : And they always do.
Walter Mondale : We don't get behind.
Walter Mondale : They won't get behind.
Walter Mondale : And that's been the tragic story of the arms race.
Walter Mondale : We have more at stake in space satellites than they do.
Walter Mondale : If we could stop, right now, the testing and the deployment of these space weapons -- and the President's proposals go clear beyond research; if it was just research we wouldn't have any argument, because maybe someday, somebody will think of something -- but to commit this nation to a buildup of antisatellite and space weapons at this time, in their crude state, would bring about an arms race that's very dangerous indeed.
Walter Mondale : One final point.
Walter Mondale : The most dangerous aspect of this proposal is, for the first time, we would delegate to computers the decision as to whether to start a war.
Walter Mondale : That's dead wrong.
Walter Mondale : There wouldn't be time for a President to decide; it would be decided by these remote computers.
Walter Mondale : It might be an oil fire, it might be a jet exhaust, the computer might decide it's a missile -- and off we go.
Walter Mondale : Why don't we stop this madness now and draw a line and keep the heavens free from war?
Walter Mondale : [Applause]
Walter Mondale : Nuclear Freeze
Marvin Kalb : "Mr. Mondale, in this general area, sir, of arms control, President Carter's national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, said, ""A nuclear freeze is a hoax.''"
Marvin Kalb : Yet the basis of your arms proposals, as I understand them, is a mutual and verifiable freeze on existing weapons systems.
Marvin Kalb : In your view, which specific weapons systems could be subject to a mutual and verifiable freeze, and which could not?
Walter Mondale : Every system that is verifiable should be placed on the table for negotiations for an agreement.
Walter Mondale : I would not agree to any negotiations or any agreement that involved conduct on the part of the Soviet Union that we couldn't verify every day.
Walter Mondale : I would not agree to any agreement in which the United States security interest was not fully recognized and supported.
Walter Mondale : That's why we say mutual and verifiable freezes.
Walter Mondale : Now, why do I support the freeze?
Walter Mondale : Because this ever-rising arms race madness makes both nations less secure.
Walter Mondale : It's more difficult to defend this nation.
Walter Mondale : It's putting a hair-trigger on nuclear war.
Walter Mondale : This administration, by going into the Star Wars system, is going to add a dangerous new escalation.
Walter Mondale : We have to be tough on the Soviet Union, but I think the American people -- --
Edwin Newman : Your time is up, Mr. Mondale.
Walter Mondale : -- -- and the people of the Soviet Union want it to stop.
Edwin Newman : President Reagan, your rebuttal?
Ronald Reagan : "Yes, my rebuttal, once again, is that this invention that has just been created here of how I would go about rolling over for the Soviet Union -- no, Mr. Mondale, my idea would be with that defensive weapon that we would sit down with them and then say, ""Now, are you willing to join us?"
Ronald Reagan : "Here's what we'' -- give them a demonstration and then say -- ""Here's what we can do."
Ronald Reagan : Now, if you're willing to join us in getting rid of all the nuclear weapons in the world, then we'll give you this one, so that we would both know that no one can cheat; that we're both got something that if anyone tries to cheat .
Ronald Reagan : 0
Ronald Reagan : 0
Ronald Reagan : .''
Ronald Reagan : But when you keep star-warring it -- I never suggested where the weapons should be or what kind; I'm not a scientist.
Ronald Reagan : I said, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff agreed with me, that it was time for us to turn our research ability to seeing if we could not find this kind of defensive weapon.
Ronald Reagan : "And suddenly somebody says, ""Oh, it's got to be up there, and it's Star Wars,'' and so forth."
Ronald Reagan : I don't know what it would be, but if we can come up with one, I think the world will be better off.
Edwin Newman : Mr. Mondale, your rebuttal.
Walter Mondale : Well, that's what a President's supposed to know -- where those weapons are going to be.
Walter Mondale : If they're space weapons, I assume they'll be in space.
Walter Mondale : [Laughter] If they're antisatellite weapons, I assume they're going to be aimed against satellites.
Walter Mondale : Now, this is the most dangerous technology that we possess.
Walter Mondale : The Soviets try to spy on us, steal this stuff.
Walter Mondale : And to give them technology of this kind, I disagree with.
Walter Mondale : You haven't just accepted research, Mr. President.
Walter Mondale : You've set up a Strategic Defense Initiative, an agency, you're beginning to test, you're talking about deploying, you're asking for a budget of some $30 billion for this purpose.
Walter Mondale : This is an arms escalation.
Walter Mondale : And we will be better off, far better off, if we stop right now, because we have more to lose in space then they do.
Walter Mondale : If someday, somebody comes along with an answer, that's something else.
Walter Mondale : But that there would be an answer in our lifetime is unimaginable.
Walter Mondale : Why do we start things that we know the Soviets will match and make us all less secure?
Walter Mondale : That's what a President's for.
Edwin Newman : Mr. Kondracke, your question to Mr. Mondale.
Edwin Newman : Strategic Weapons
Morton Kondracke : Mr. Mondale, you say that with respect to the Soviet Union you want to negotiate a mutual nuclear freeze, yet you would unilaterally give up the MX missile and the B - 1 bomber before the talks have even begun.
Morton Kondracke : And you have announced, in advance, that reaching an agreement with the Soviets is the most important thing in the world to you.
Morton Kondracke : Now, aren't you giving away half the store before you even sit down to talk?
Walter Mondale : No.
Walter Mondale : As a matter of fact, we have a vast range of technology and weaponry right now that provides all the bargaining chips that we need.
Walter Mondale : And I support the air launch cruise missile, the ground launch cruise missile, the Pershing missile, the Trident submarine, the D - 5 submarine, Stealth technology, the Midgetman -- we have a whole range of technology.
Walter Mondale : Why I disagree with the MX is that it's a sitting duck.
Walter Mondale : It'll draw an attack.
Walter Mondale : It puts a hair-trigger, and it is a dangerous, destabilizing weapon.
Walter Mondale : And the B - 1 is similarly to be opposed, because for 15 years the Soviet Union has been preparing to meet the B - 1.
Walter Mondale : The Secretary of Defense himself said it would be a suicide mission if it were built.
Walter Mondale : Instead, I want to build the Midgetman, which is mobile and thus less vulnerable, contributing to stability, and a weapon that will give us security and contribute to an incentive for arms control.
Walter Mondale : That's why I'm for Stealth technology, to build a Stealth bomber -- which I've supported for years -- that can penetrate the Soviet air defense system without any hope that they can perceive where it is because their radar system is frustrated.
Walter Mondale : In other words, a President has to make choices.
Walter Mondale : This makes us stronger.
Walter Mondale : The final point is that we can use this money that we save on these weapons to spend on things that we really need.
Walter Mondale : Our conventional strength in Europe is under strength.
Walter Mondale : We need to strengthen that in order to assure our Western allies of our presence there, a strong defense, but also to diminish and reduce the likelihood of a commencement of a war and the use of nuclear weapons.
Walter Mondale : It's in this way, by making wise choices, that we're stronger, we enhance the chances of arms control.
Walter Mondale : Every President until this one has been able to do it, and this nation -- or the world is more dangerous as a result.
Walter Mondale : Nuclear Freeze
Morton Kondracke : I want to follow up on Mr. Kalb's question.
Morton Kondracke : It seems to me on the question of verifiability, that you do have some problems with the extent of the freeze.
Morton Kondracke : It seems to me, for example, that testing would be very difficult to verify because the Soviets encode their telemetry.
Morton Kondracke : Research would be impossible to verify.
Morton Kondracke : Numbers of warheads would be impossible to verify by satellite, except for with onsite inspection, and production of any weapon would be impossible to verify.
Morton Kondracke : Now, in view of that, what is going to be frozen?
Walter Mondale : I will not agree to any arms control agreement, including a freeze, that's not verifiable.
Walter Mondale : Let's take your warhead principle.
Walter Mondale : The warhead principle -- there have been counting rules for years.
Walter Mondale : Whenever a weapon is tested we count the number of warheads on it, and whenever that warhead is used we count that number of warheads, whether they have that number or less on it, or not.
Walter Mondale : These are standard rules.
Walter Mondale : I will not agree to any production restrictions -- or agreements, unless we have the ability to verify those agreements.
Walter Mondale : I don't trust the Russians.
Walter Mondale : I believe that every agreement we reach must be verifiable, and I will not agree to anything that we cannot tell every day.
Walter Mondale : In other words, we've got to be tough.
Walter Mondale : But in order to stop this arms madness, we've got to push ahead with tough negotiations that are verifiable so that we know the Soviets are agreeing and living up to their agreement.
Walter Mondale : Support for U.S.
Walter Mondale : Allies
Morton Kondracke : Mr. President, I want to ask you a question about negotiating with friends.
Morton Kondracke : You severely criticized President Carter for helping to undermine two friendly dictators who got into trouble with their own people -- the Shah of Iran and President Somoza of Nicaragua.
Morton Kondracke : Now there are other such leaders heading for trouble, including President Pinochet of Chile and President Marcos of the Philippines.
Morton Kondracke : What should you do, and what can you do to prevent the Philippines from becoming another Nicaragua?
Ronald Reagan : Morton, I did criticize the President because of our undercutting of what was a stalwart ally -- the Shah of Iran.
Ronald Reagan : And I am not at all convinced that he was that far out of line with his people or that they wanted that to happen.
Ronald Reagan : The Shah had done our bidding and carried our load in the Middle East for quite some time, and I did think that it was a blot on our record that we let him down.
Ronald Reagan : Have things gotten better?
Ronald Reagan : The Shah, whatever he might have done, was building low-cost housing, had taken land away from the Mullahs and was distributing it to the peasants so they could be landowners -- things of that kind.
Ronald Reagan : But we turned it over to a maniacal fanatic who has slaughtered thousands and thousands of people, calling it executions.
Ronald Reagan : The matter of Somoza -- no, I never defended Somoza.
Ronald Reagan : And, as a matter of fact, the previous administration stood by and so did I -- not that I could have done anything in my position at that time -- but for this revolution to take place.
Ronald Reagan : And the promise of the revolution was democracy, human rights, free labor unions, free press.
Ronald Reagan : And then, just as Castro had done in Cuba, the Sandinistas ousted the other parties to the revolution.
Ronald Reagan : Many of them are now the contras.
Ronald Reagan : They exiled some, they jailed some, they murdered some.
Ronald Reagan : And they installed a Marxist-Leninist totalitarian government.
Ronald Reagan : And what I have to say about this is, many times -- and this has to do with the Philippines, also, I know there are things there in the Philippines that do not look good to us from the standpoint right now of democratic rights, but what is the alternative?
Ronald Reagan : It is a large Communist movement to take over the Philippines.
Ronald Reagan : They have been our friend since their inception as a nation.
Ronald Reagan : And I think that we've had enough of a record of letting -- under the guise of revolution -- someone that we thought was a little more right than we would be, letting that person go, and then winding up with totalitarianism, pure and simple, as the alternative.
Ronald Reagan : And I think that we're better off, for example with the Philippines, of trying to retain our friendship and help them right the wrongs we see, rather than throwing them to the wolves and then facing a Communist power in the Pacific.
Morton Kondracke : Mr. President, since the United States has two strategically important bases in the Philippines, would the overthrow of President Marcos constitute a threat to vital American interests and, if so, what would you do about it?
Ronald Reagan : Well, as I say, we have to look at what an overthrow there would mean and what the government would be that would follow.
Ronald Reagan : And there is every evidence, every indication that that government would be hostile to the United States.
Ronald Reagan : And that would be a severe blow to our abilities there in the Pacific.
Morton Kondracke : And what would you do about it?
Edwin Newman : Sorry.
Edwin Newman : I'm sorry, you've asked the followup question.
Edwin Newman : Mr. Mondale, your rebuttal?
Walter Mondale : Perhaps in no area do we disagree more than this administration's policies on human rights.
Walter Mondale : I went to the Philippines as Vice President, pressed for human rights, called for the release of Aquino, and made progress that had been stalled on both the Subic and the Clark airfield bases.
Walter Mondale : What explains this administration cozying up to the Argentine dictators after they took over?
Walter Mondale : Fortunately, a democracy took over, but this nation was embarrassed by this current administration's adoption of their policies.
Walter Mondale : What happens in South Africa, where, for example, the Nobel Prize winner, 2 days ago, said this administration is seen as working with the oppressive government of South Africa.
Walter Mondale : That hurts this nation.
Walter Mondale : We need to stand for human rights.
Walter Mondale : We need to make it clear we're for human liberty.
Walter Mondale : National security and human rights must go together.
Walter Mondale : But this administration time and time again has lost its way in this field.
Edwin Newman : President Reagan, your rebuttal.
Ronald Reagan : Well, the invasion of Afghanistan didn't take place on our watch.
Ronald Reagan : I have described what has happened in Iran, and we weren't here then either.
Ronald Reagan : I don't think that our record of human rights can be assailed.
Ronald Reagan : I think that we have observed, ourselves, and have done our best to see that human rights are extended throughout the world.
Ronald Reagan : Mr. Mondale has recently announced a plan of his to get the democracies together and to work with the whole world to turn to democracy.
Ronald Reagan : And I was glad to hear him say that, because that's what we've been doing ever since I announced to the British Parliament that I thought we should do this.
Ronald Reagan : "Human rights are not advanced when, at the same time, you then stand back and say, ""Whoops, we didn't know the gun was loaded,'' and you have another totalitarian power on your hands."
Edwin Newman : In this segment, because of the pressure of time, there will be no rebuttals, and there will be no followup questions.
Edwin Newman : Mr. Trewhitt, your question to President Reagan.
Edwin Newman : Mr. Trewhitt.
Edwin Newman : One question to each candidate?
Edwin Newman : One question to each candidate.
Edwin Newman : Nuclear Weapons
Edwin Newman : Mr. Trewhitt.
Edwin Newman : Mr. President, could I take you back to something you said earlier, and if I'm misquoting you, please correct me.
Edwin Newman : "But I understood you to say that if the development of space military technology was successful, you might give the Soviets a demonstration and say, ""Here it is,'' which sounds to me as if you might be trying to gain the sort of advantage that would enable you to dictate terms, and which I will then suggest to you might mean scrapping a generation of nuclear strategy called mutual deterrence in which we, in effect, hold each other hostage."
Edwin Newman : Is that your intention?
Ronald Reagan : Well, I can't say that I have roundtabled that and sat down with the Chiefs of Staff, but I have said that it seems to me that this could be a logical step in what is my ultimate goal, my ultimate dream, and that is the elimination of nuclear weapons in the world.
Ronald Reagan : And it seems to me that this could be an adjunct, or certainly a great assisting agent in getting that done.
Ronald Reagan : I am not going to roll over, as Mr. Mondale suggests, and give them something that could turn around and be used against us.
Ronald Reagan : But I think it's a very interesting proposal, to see if we can find, first of all, something that renders those weapons obsolete, incapable of their mission.
Ronald Reagan : But Mr. Mondale seems to approve MAD -- MAD is mutual assured destruction -- meaning, if you use nuclear weapons on us, the only thing we have to keep you from doing it is that we'll kill as many people of yours as you'll kill of ours.
Ronald Reagan : I think that to do everything we can to find, as I say, something that would destroy weapons and not humans is a great step forward in human rights.
Ronald Reagan : Mr. Trewhitt.
Ronald Reagan : Mr. Mondale, could I ask you to address the question of nuclear strategy then?
Ronald Reagan : The formal doctrine is very arcane, but I'm going to ask you to deal with it anyway.
Ronald Reagan : Do you believe in MAD, mutual assured destruction, mutual deterrence as it has been practiced for the last generation?
Walter Mondale : I believe in a sensible arms control approach that brings down these weapons to manageable levels.
Walter Mondale : I would like to see their elimination.
Walter Mondale : And in the meantime, we have to be strong enough to make certain that the Soviet Union never tempts us.
Walter Mondale : Now, here we have to decide between generalized objectives and reality.
Walter Mondale : The President says he wants to eliminate or reduce the number of nuclear weapons.
Walter Mondale : But, in fact, these last 4 years have seen more weapons built, a wider and more vigorous arms race than in human history.
Walter Mondale : He says he wants a system that will make nuclear wars safe, so nobody's going to get hurt.
Walter Mondale : Well, maybe someday, somebody can dream of that.
Walter Mondale : But why start an arms race now?
Walter Mondale : Why destabilize our relationship?
Walter Mondale : Why threaten our space satellites upon which we depend?
Walter Mondale : Why pursue a strategy that would delegate to computers the question of starting a war?
Walter Mondale : A President, to defend this country and to get arms control, must master what's going on.
Walter Mondale : I accept his objective and his dream; we all do.
Walter Mondale : But the hard reality is that we must know what we're doing and pursue those objectives that are possible in our time.
Walter Mondale : He's opposed every effort of every President to do so, and in the 4 years of his administration he's failed to do so.
Walter Mondale : And if you want a tough President who uses that strength to get arms control and draws the line in the heavens, vote for Walter Mondale.
Walter Mondale : [Applause]
Edwin Newman : Please, I must again ask the audience not to applaud, not to cheer, not to demonstrate its feelings in any way.
Edwin Newman : We've arrived at the point in the debate now where we call for closing statements.
Edwin Newman : You have the full 4 minutes, each of you.
Edwin Newman : Mr. Mondale, will you go first?
Edwin Newman : Closing Statements
Walter Mondale : I want to thank the League of Women Voters, the good citizens of Kansas City, and President Reagan for agreeing to debate this evening.
Walter Mondale : This evening we talked about national strength.
Walter Mondale : I believe we need to be strong, and I will keep us strong.
Walter Mondale : But I think strength must also require wisdom and smarts in its exercise.
Walter Mondale : That's key to the strength of our nation.
Walter Mondale : A President must know the essential facts essential to command.
Walter Mondale : But a President must also have a vision of where this nation should go.
Walter Mondale : Tonight, as Americans, you have a choice.
Walter Mondale : And you're entitled to know where we would take this country if you decide to elect us.
Walter Mondale : As President, I would press for long-term, vigorous economic growth.
Walter Mondale : That's why I want to get these debts down and these interest rates down, restore America's exports, help rural America, which is suffering so much, and bring the jobs back here for our children.
Walter Mondale : I want this next generation to be the best educated in American history, to invest in the human mind and science again, so we're out front.
Walter Mondale : I want this nation to protect its air, its water, its land, and its public health.
Walter Mondale : America is not temporary; we're forever.
Walter Mondale : And as Americans, our generation should protect this wonderful land for our children.
Walter Mondale : I want a nation of fairness, where no one is denied the fullness of life or discriminated against, and we deal compassionately with those in our midst who are in trouble.
Walter Mondale : And, above all, I want a nation that's strong.
Walter Mondale : Since we debated 2 weeks ago, the United States and the Soviet Union have built a hundred more warheads, enough to kill millions of Americans and millions of Soviet citizens.
Walter Mondale : This doesn't strengthen us.
Walter Mondale : This weakens the chances of civilization to survive.
Walter Mondale : I remember the night before I became Vice President.
Walter Mondale : I was given the briefing and told that any time, night or day, I might be called upon to make the most fateful decision on Earth -- whether to fire these atomic weapons that could destroy the human species.
Walter Mondale : That lesson tells us two things: One, pick a President that you know will know if that tragic moment ever comes what he must know, because there'll be no time for staffing committees or advisers.
Walter Mondale : A President must know right then.
Walter Mondale : But above all, pick a President who will fight to avoid the day when that God-awful decision ever needs to be made.
Walter Mondale : And that's why this election is so terribly important.
Walter Mondale : America and Americans decide not just what's happening in this country.
Walter Mondale : We are the strongest and most powerful free society on Earth.
Walter Mondale : When you make that judgment, you are deciding not only the future of our nation; in a very profound respect, you're deciding the future of the world.
Walter Mondale : We need to move on.
Walter Mondale : It's time for America to find new leadership.
Walter Mondale : Please, join me in this cause to move confidently and with a sense of assurance and command to build the blessed future of our nation.
Edwin Newman : President Reagan, your summation, please.
Ronald Reagan : Yes.
Ronald Reagan : My thanks to the League of Women Voters, to the panelists, the moderator, and to the people of Kansas City for their warm hospitality and greeting.
Ronald Reagan : I think the American people tonight have much to be grateful for -- an economic recovery that has become expansion, freedom and, most of all, we are at peace.
Ronald Reagan : I am grateful for the chance to reaffirm my commitment to reduce nuclear weapons and, one day, to eliminate them entirely.
Ronald Reagan : The question before you comes down to this: Do you want to see America return to the policies of weakness of the last 4 years?
Ronald Reagan : Or do we want to go forward, marching together, as a nation of strength and that's going to continue to be strong?
Ronald Reagan : We shouldn't be dwelling on the past, or even the present.
Ronald Reagan : The meaning of this election is the future and whether we're going to grow and provide the jobs and the opportunities for all Americans and that they need.
Ronald Reagan : Several years ago, I was given an assignment to write a letter.
Ronald Reagan : It was to go into a time capsule and would be read in 100 years when that time capsule was opened.
Ronald Reagan : I remember driving down the California coast one day.
Ronald Reagan : My mind was full of what I was going to put in that letter about the problems and the issues that confront us in our time and what we did about them.
Ronald Reagan : But I couldn't completely neglect the beauty around me -- the Pacific out there on one side of the highway, shining in the sunlight, the mountains of the coast range rising on the other side.
Ronald Reagan : And I found myself wondering what it would be like for someone -- wondering if someone 100 years from now would be driving down that highway, and if they would see the same thing.
Ronald Reagan : And with that thought, I realized what a job I had with that letter.
Ronald Reagan : I would be writing a letter to people who know everything there is to know about us.
Ronald Reagan : We know nothing about them.
Ronald Reagan : They would know all about our problems.
Ronald Reagan : They would know how we solved them, and whether our solution was beneficial to them down through the years or whether it hurt them.
Ronald Reagan : They would also know that we lived in a world with terrible weapons, nuclear weapons of terrible destructive power, aimed at each other, capable of crossing the ocean in a matter of minutes and destroying civilization as we knew it.
Ronald Reagan : And then I thought to myself, what are they going to say about us, what are those people 100 years from now going to think?
Ronald Reagan : They will know whether we used those weapons or not.
Ronald Reagan : Well, what they will say about us 100 years from now depends on how we keep our rendezvous with destiny.
Ronald Reagan : "Will we do the things that we know must be done and know that one day, down in history 100 years or perhaps before, someone will say, ""Thank God for those people back in the 1980's for preserving our freedom, for saving for us this blessed planet called Earth, with all its grandeur and its beauty.''"
Ronald Reagan : You know, I am grateful to all of you for giving me the opportunity to serve you for these 4 years, and I seek reelection because I want more than anything else to try to complete the new beginning that we charted 4 years ago.
Ronald Reagan : George Bush, who I think is one of the finest Vice Presidents this country has ever had -- George Bush and I have crisscrossed the country, and we've had, in these last few months, a wonderful experience.
Ronald Reagan : We have met young America.
Ronald Reagan : We have met your sons and daughters.
Edwin Newman : Mr. President, I'm obliged to cut you off there under the rules of the debate.
Edwin Newman : I'm sorry.
Ronald Reagan : All right.
Ronald Reagan : I was just going to -- --
Edwin Newman : Perhaps I should point out that the rules under which I did that were agreed upon by the two campaigns -- --
Ronald Reagan : I know.
Edwin Newman : -- -- with the league, as you know, sir.
Ronald Reagan : I know, yes.
Edwin Newman : Thank you, Mr. President.
Edwin Newman : Thank you, Mr. Mondale.
Edwin Newman : Our thanks also to the panel, finally, to our audience.
Edwin Newman : We thank you, and the League of Women Voters asks me to say to you, don't forget to vote on November 6th.
