Information : October 15, 1992
Information : The Second Clinton-Bush-Perot Presidential Debate
Carole Simpson : Good evening and welcome to this second of three presidential debates between the major candidates for president of the US.
Carole Simpson : The candidates are the Republican nominee, President George Bush, the independent Ross Perot and Governor Bill Clinton, the Democratic nominee.
Carole Simpson : My name is Carole Simpson, and I will be the moderator for tonight's 90-minute debate, which is coming to you from the campus of the University of Richmond in Richmond, Virginia.
Carole Simpson : Now, tonight's program is unlike any other presidential debate in history.
Carole Simpson : We're making history now and it's pretty exciting.
Carole Simpson : An independent polling firm has selected an audience of 209 uncommitted voters from this area.
Carole Simpson : The candidates will be asked questions by these voters on a topic of their choosing -- anything they want to ask about.
Carole Simpson : My job as moderator is to, you know, take care of the questioning, ask questions myself if I think there needs to be continuity and balance, and sometimes I might ask the candidates to respond to what another candidate may have said.
Carole Simpson : Now, the format has been agreed to by representatives of both the Republican and Democratic campaigns, and there is no subject matter that is restricted.
Carole Simpson : Anything goes.
Carole Simpson : We can ask anything.
Carole Simpson : After the debate, the candidates will have an opportunity to make a closing statement.
Carole Simpson : So, President Bush, I think you said it earlier -- let's get it on.
George Bush : Let's go.
Carole Simpson : And I think the first question is over here.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Yes.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : I'd like to direct my question to Mr. Perot.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : What will you do as president to open foreign markets to fair competition from American business and to stop unfair competition here at home from foreign countries so that we can bring jobs back to the US?
Ross Perot : That's right at the top of my agenda.
Ross Perot : We've shipped millions of jobs overseas and we have a strange situation because we have a process in Washington where after you've served for a while you cash in, become a foreign lobbyist, make $30,000 a month, then take a leave, work on presidential campaigns, make sure you've got good contacts and then go back out.
Ross Perot : Now, if you just want to get down to brass tacks, first thing you ought to do is get all these folks who've got these 1-way trade agreements that we've negotiated over the years and say fellas, we'll take the same deal we gave you.
Ross Perot : And they'll gridlock right at that point because for example, we've got international competitors who simply could not unload their cars off the ships if they had to comply -- you see, if it was a 2-way street, just couldn't do it.
Ross Perot : We have got to stop sending jobs overseas.
Ross Perot : To those of you in the audience who are business people: pretty simple.
Ross Perot : If you're paying $12, $13, $14 an hour for a factory worker, and you can move your factory south of the border, pay $1 an hour for labor, hire a young -- let's assume you've been in business for a long time.
Ross Perot : You've got a mature workforce.
Ross Perot : Pay $1 an hour for your labor, have no health care -- that's the most expensive single element in making the car.
Ross Perot : Have no environmental controls, no pollution controls and no retirement.
Ross Perot : And you don't care about anything but making money.
Ross Perot : There will be a job-sucking sound going south.
Ross Perot : If the people send me to Washington the first thing I'll do is study that 2000-page agreement and make sure it's a 2-way street.
Ross Perot : One last point here.
Ross Perot : "I decided I was dumb and didn't understand it so I called a ""Who's Who"" of the folks that have been around it, and I said why won't everybody go south; they said it will be disruptive; I said for how long."
Ross Perot : I finally got 'em for 12 to 15 years.
Ross Perot : And I said, well, how does it stop being disruptive?
Ross Perot : And that is when their jobs come up from a dollar an hour to $6 an hour, and ours go down to $6 an hour; then it's leveled again, but in the meantime you've wrecked the country with these kind of deals.
Ross Perot : We got to cut it out.
Carole Simpson : Thank you, Mr. Perot.
Carole Simpson : I see that the president has stood up, so he must have something to say about this.
George Bush : Carole, the thing that saved us in this global economic slowdown has been our exports, and what I'm trying to do is increase our exports.
George Bush : And if indeed all the jobs were going to move south because there are lower wages, there are lower wages now and they haven't done that.
George Bush : And so I have just negotiated with the president of Mexico the North American Free Trade Agreement -- and the prime minister of Canada, I might add -- and I want to have more of these free trade agreements, because export jobs are increasing far faster than any jobs that may have moved overseas.
George Bush : That's a scare tactic, because it's not that many.
George Bush : But any one that's here, we want to have more jobs here.
George Bush : And the way to do that is to increase our exports.
George Bush : Some believe in protection.
George Bush : I don't; I believe in free and fair trade, and that's the thing that saved us.
George Bush : So I will keep on as president trying to get a successful conclusion to the GATT Round, the big Uruguay Round of trade which will really open up markets for our agriculture particularly.
George Bush : I want to continue to work after we get this NAFTA agreement ratified this coming year.
George Bush : I want to get one with Eastern Europe; I want to get one with Chile.
George Bush : And free and fair trade is the answer, not protection.
George Bush : And, as I say, we've had tough economic times, and it's exports that have saved us, exports that have built.
Carole Simpson : Governor Clinton.
Bill Clinton : I'd like to answer the question, because I've actually been a governor for 12 years, so I've known a lot of people who have lost their jobs because of jobs moving overseas, and I know a lot of people whose plants have been strengthened by increasing exports.
Bill Clinton : The trick is to expand our export base and to expand trade on terms that are fair to us.
Bill Clinton : It is true that our exports to Mexico, for example, have gone up and our trade deficit has gone down; it's also true that just today a record high trade deficit was announced with Japan.
Bill Clinton : So what is the answer?
Bill Clinton : Let me just mention three things very quickly.
Bill Clinton : Number one, make sure that other countries are as open to our markets as our markets are to them, and, if they're not, have measures on the books that don't take forever and a day to implement.
Bill Clinton : Number two, change the tax code.
Bill Clinton : There are more deductions in the tax code for shutting plants down and moving overseas than there are for modernizing plant and equipment here.
Bill Clinton : Our competitors don't do that.
Bill Clinton : Emphasize and subsidize modernizing plant and equipment here, not moving plants overseas.
Bill Clinton : Number three, stop the federal government's program that now gives low-interest loans and job training funds to companies that will actually shut down and move to other countries, but we won't do the same thing for plants that stay here.
Bill Clinton : So more trade but on fair terms -- and favor investment in America.
Carole Simpson : Thank you.
Carole Simpson : I think we have a question over here.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : This is for Governor Clinton.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : In the real world, that is, outside of Washington, DC, compensation and achievement are based on goals defined and achieved.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : My question is about the deficit.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Would you define in specific dollar goals how much you would reduce the deficit in each of the 4 years of a Clinton administration and then enter into a legally binding contract with the American people, that if you did not achieve those goals that you would not seek a 2nd term?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Answer yes or no and then comment on your answer, please.
Bill Clinton : No, and here's why.
Bill Clinton : And I'll tell you exactly why.
Bill Clinton : Because the deficit now has been building up for 12 years.
Bill Clinton : I'll tell you exactly what I think can be done.
Bill Clinton : I think we can bring it down by 50% in 4 years and grow the economy.
Bill Clinton : Now, I could get rid of it in 4 years in theory on the books now, but to do it you'd have to raise taxes too much and cut benefits too much to people who need them and it would even make the economy worse.
Bill Clinton : Mr. Perot will tell you, for example, that the expert he hired to analyze his plan says that it will bring the deficit down in 5 years but it will make unemployment bad for 4 more years.
Bill Clinton : So my view is, sir, you have to increase investment, grow the economy and reduce the deficit by controlling health care costs, prudent reductions in defense, cuts in domestic programs and asking the wealthiest Americans and foreign corporations to pay their fair share of taxes and investing and growing this economy.
Bill Clinton : I ask everybody to look at my economic ideas and 9 Nobel prize winners and over 500 economists and hundreds of business people, including a lot of Republicans said, this is the way you've got to go.
Bill Clinton : If you don't grow the economy you can't get it done.
Bill Clinton : But I can't foresee all the things that will happen, and I don't think a president should be judged solely on the deficit.
Bill Clinton : Let me also say, we're having an election today.
Bill Clinton : You'll have a shot at me in 4 years and you can vote me right out if you think I've done a lousy job and I would welcome you to do that.
Carole Simpson : Mr. President.
George Bush : Well, I'm a little confused here, because I don't see how you can grow the deficit down by raising people's taxes.
George Bush : You see, I don't think the American people are taxed too little.
George Bush : I think they're taxed too much.
George Bush : I went for one tax increase and when I make a mistake I admit it.
George Bush : I said that wasn't the right thing to do.
George Bush : Governor Clinton's program wants to tax more and spend more -- $150 billion in new taxes, spend another $220.
George Bush : I don't believe that's the way to do it.
George Bush : Here's some thing that'll help.
George Bush : Give us a balanced budget amendment.
George Bush : He always talks about Arkansas having a balanced budget and they do, but he has a balanced budget amendment.
George Bush : Have to do it.
George Bush : I'd like the government to have that.
George Bush : And I think it would discipline not only the Congress, which needs it, but also the executive branch.
George Bush : I'd like to have what 43 governors have -- the line item veto, so if the Congress can't cut, and we've got a reckless spending Congress, let the president have a shot at it by wiping out things that are pork barrel or something of that nature.
George Bush : I've proposed another one.
George Bush : Some sophisticates think it may be a little gimmicky.
George Bush : I think it's good.
George Bush : It's a check- off.
George Bush : It says to you as a taxpayer -- say you're going to pay a tax of 1000 bucks or something.
George Bush : You can check 10% of that if you want to, in the 1 box, and that 10%, $100, or if you're paying $10,000, whatever it is, $1000, check it off and make the government, make it lower the deficit by that amount.
George Bush : And if the Congress won't do it, if they can't get together and negotiate how to do that, then you'd have a sequester across the board.
George Bush : You'd exempt Social Security -- I don't want to tax or touch Social Security.
George Bush : I'm the president that said hey, don't mess with Social Security, and we haven't.
George Bush : So I believe that we need to control the growth of mandatory spending, back to this gentleman's question.
George Bush : That's the main growing thing in the budget.
George Bush : The program that the president -- two-thirds of the budget, I as president never get to look at, never get to touch.
George Bush : We've got to control that growth to inflation and population increase, but not raise taxes on the American people now.
George Bush : I just don't believe that would stimulate any kind of growth at all.
Carole Simpson : How about you, Mr. Perot?
Ross Perot : Well, we're $4 trillion in debt.
Ross Perot : We're going into debt an additional $1 billion, little more than $1 billion every working day of the year.
Ross Perot : Now, the thing I love about it -- I'm just a businessman.
Ross Perot : I was down in Texas taking care of business, tending to my family.
Ross Perot : This situation got so bad that I decided I'd better get into it.
Ross Perot : The American people asked me to get into it.
Ross Perot : But I just find it fascinating that while we sit here tonight we will go into debt an additional $50 million in an hour and a half.
Ross Perot : Now, it's not the Republicans' fault, of course, and it's not the Democrats' fault.
Ross Perot : And what I'm looking for is who did it?
Ross Perot : Now, they're the 2 folks involved so maybe if you put them together, they did it.
Ross Perot : Now, the facts are we have to fix it.
Ross Perot : I'm here tonight for these young people up here in the balcony from this college.
Ross Perot : When I was a young man, when I got out of the Navy I had multiple job offers.
Ross Perot : Young people with high grades can't get a job.
Ross Perot : People -- the 18- to 24-year-old high school graduates 10 years ago were making more than they are now.
Ross Perot : In other words, we were down to 18% of them were making -- 18- to 24-year- olds were making less than $12,000.
Ross Perot : Now that's up to 40%.
Ross Perot : And what's happened in the meantime?
Ross Perot : The dollar's gone through the floor.
Ross Perot : Now, whose fault is that?
Ross Perot : Not the Democrats.
Ross Perot : Not the Republicans.
Ross Perot : Somewhere out there there's an extraterrestrial that's doing this to us, I guess.
Ross Perot : And everybody says they take responsibility.
Ross Perot : Somebody somewhere has to take responsibility for this.
Ross Perot : Put it to you bluntly, American people.
Ross Perot : If you want me to be your president, we're going to face our problems.
Ross Perot : We˘âĴâ˘ll deal with our problems, we˘âĴâ˘ll solve our problems.
Ross Perot : We'll down our debt.
Ross Perot : We'll pass on the American dream to our children, and I will not leave our children a situation that they have today.
Ross Perot : When I was a boy it took 2 generations to double the standard of living.
Ross Perot : Today it will take 12 generations.
Ross Perot : Our children will not see the American dream because of this debt that somebody somewhere dropped on us.
Carole Simpson : You're all wonderful speakers, and I know you have lots more to add, but I've talked to this audience, and they have lots of questions on other topics.
Carole Simpson : Can we move to another topic, please?
Carole Simpson : We have one up here, I think.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Yes, I'd like to address all the candidates with this question.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : The amount of time the candidates have spent in this campaign trashing their opponents' character and their programs is depressingly large.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Why can't your discussions and proposals reflect the genuine complexity and the difficulty of the issues to try to build a consensus around the best aspects of all proposals?
Carole Simpson : Who wants to take that one?
Carole Simpson : Mr. Perot, you have an answer for everything, don't you?
Carole Simpson : Go right ahead, sir.
Ross Perot : No, I don't have an answer for everything.
Ross Perot : As you all know, I've been buying 30-minute segments to talk about issues.
Ross Perot : And tomorrow night on NBC, from 10:30 to 11 Eastern, we're going to talk about how you pay the debt down, so we're going to come right down to that one.
Ross Perot : We'll be on again Saturday night, 8 to 9 o'clock on ABC.
Ross Perot : So the point is --
George Bush : Like Jerry Brown, the 800 number.
Ross Perot : -- I couldn't agree with you more, couldn't agree with you more.
Ross Perot : And I have said again and again and again let's get off mud wrestling, let's get off personalities and let's talk about jobs, health care, crime, the things that concern the American people.
Ross Perot : I'm spending my money -- not PAC money, not foreign money, my money -- to take this message to the people.
Carole Simpson : Thank you, Mr. Perot.
Carole Simpson : So that seems directed; he would say it's you gentlemen that have been doing that.
Carole Simpson : Mr. Clinton, Governor Clinton -- oh, President Bush, how would you like to respond?
George Bush : Well, in the first place, I believe that character is a part of being president.
George Bush : I think you have to look at it.
George Bush : I think that has to be a part of a candidate for president or being president.
George Bush : In terms of programs, I've submitted, what, 4 different budgets to the US Congress in great detail.
George Bush : It's so heavy they'd give you a broken back.
George Bush : And everything in there says what I am for.
George Bush : Now I've come out with a new agenda for America's renewal, a plan that I believe really will help stimulate the growth of this economy.
George Bush : My record on world affairs is pretty well known because I've been president for 4 years, so I feel I've been talking issues.
George Bush : You know, nobody likes who shot John, but I think the first negative campaign run in this election was by Governor Clinton, and I'm not going to sit there and be a punching bag; I'm going to stand up and say, hey, listen, here's my side of it.
George Bush : But character is an important part of the equation.
George Bush : The other night Governor Clinton raised my -- I don't know if you saw the debate the other night.
George Bush : You did -- suffered through that?
George Bush : Well, he raised the question of my father -- it was a good line, well rehearsed and well delivered.
George Bush : But he raised the question of my father and said, well, your father, Prescott Bush, was against McCarthy, you should be ashamed of yourself, McCarthyism.
George Bush : I remember something my dad told me -- I was 18 years old going to Penn Station to go on into the Navy, and he said write your mother -- which I faithfully did; he said serve your country -- my father was an honor, duty and country man; and he said tell the truth.
George Bush : And I've tried to do that in public life, all through it.
George Bush : That says something about character.
George Bush : My argument with Governor Clinton -- you can call it mud wrestling, but I think it's fair to put it in focus is -- I am deeply troubled by someone who demonstrates and organizes demonstration in a foreign land when his country's at war.
George Bush : Probably a lot of kids here disagree with me.
George Bush : But that's what I feel.
George Bush : That's what I feel passionately about.
George Bush : I'm thinking of Ross Perot's running mate sitting in the jail.
George Bush : How would he feel about it?
George Bush : But maybe that's generational.
George Bush : I don't know.
George Bush : But the big argument I have with the governor on this is this taking different positions on different issues -- trying to be one thing to one person here that's opposing the NAFTA agreement and then for it -- what we call waffling.
George Bush : And I do think that you can't turn the White House into the Waffle House.
George Bush : You've got to say what you're for and you've got to --
Carole Simpson : Mr. President, I'm getting time cues and with all due respect --
George Bush : Excuse me.
George Bush : I don't want to --
Carole Simpson : I'm sorry.
George Bush : I don't want to --
Carole Simpson : Governor Clinton.
George Bush : I get wound up because I feel strongly --
Carole Simpson : Yes, you do.
Carole Simpson : (Laughter)
Bill Clinton : Let me say first of all to you that I believe so strongly in the question you asked that I suggested this format tonight.
Bill Clinton : I started doing these formats a year ago in New Hampshire and I found that we had huge crowds because all I did was let people ask questions and I tried to give very specific answers.
Bill Clinton : I also had a program starting last year.
Bill Clinton : I've been disturbed by the tone and the tenor of this campaign.
Bill Clinton : Thank goodness the networks have a fact check so I don't have to just go blue in the face anymore.
Bill Clinton : Mr. Bush said once again I was going to have $150 billion tax increase.
Bill Clinton : When Mr. Quayle said that all the networks said, that's not true.
Bill Clinton : He's got over $100 billion of tax cuts and incentives.
Bill Clinton : So I'm not going to take up your time tonight, but let me just say this.
Bill Clinton : We'll have a debate in 4 days and we can talk about this character thing again.
Bill Clinton : "But the Washington Post ran a long editorial today saying they couldn't believe Mr. Bush was making character an issue and they said he was the greatest quote ""political chameleon"" for changing his positions of all times."
Bill Clinton : Now, I don't want to get into that --
George Bush : Please don't get into the Washington Post.
Bill Clinton : Wait a minute.
Bill Clinton : Let's don't -- you don't have to believe it.
Bill Clinton : Here's my point.
Bill Clinton : I'm not interested in his character.
Bill Clinton : I want to change the character of the presidency.
Bill Clinton : And I'm interested in what we can trust him to do and what you can trust me to do and what you can trust Mr. Perot to do for the next 4 years.
Bill Clinton : So I think you're right and I hope the rest of the night belongs to you.
Carole Simpson : May I -- I talked to this audience before you gentlemen came and I asked them about how they felt about the tenor of the campaign.
Carole Simpson : Would you like to let them know what you thought about that, when I said are you pleased with how the campaign's been going?
Carole Simpson : "(Audience: ""No."")"
Carole Simpson : Who wants to say why you don't like the way the campaign is going?
Carole Simpson : We have a gentleman back here.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : And forgive the notes here but I'm shy on camera.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : The focus of my work as a domestic mediator is meeting the needs of the children that I work with, by way of their parents, and not the wants of their parents.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : And I ask the three of you, how can we, as symbolically the children of the future president, expect the two of you, the three of you to meet our needs, the needs in housing and in crime and you name it, as opposed to the wants of your political spin doctors and your political parties?
Carole Simpson : So your question is?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Can we focus on the issues and not the personalities and the mud?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : I think there's a need, if we could take a poll here with the folks from Gallup perhaps, I think there's a real need here to focus at this point on the needs.
Carole Simpson : How do you respond?
Carole Simpson : How do you gentlemen respond to --
Bill Clinton : I agree with him.
George Bush : Let's do it.
Carole Simpson : President Bush?
George Bush : Let's do it.
George Bush : Let's talk about programs for children.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Could we cross our hearts?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : It sounds silly here but could we make a commitment?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : You know, we're not under oath at this point but could you make a commitment to the citizens of the US to meet our needs, and we have many, and not yours again?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : I repeat that.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : It's a real need, I think, that we all have.
George Bush : I think it depends how you define it.
George Bush : I mean, I think in general, let's talk about these issues.
George Bush : Let's talk about the programs.
George Bush : But in the presidency, a lot goes into it.
George Bush : Caring goes into it.
George Bush : That's not particularly specific.
George Bush : Strength goes into it.
George Bush : That's not specific.
George Bush : Standing up against aggression.
George Bush : That's not specific in terms of a program.
George Bush : This is what a president has to do.
George Bush : So in principle, though, I'll take your point and think we ought to discuss child care or whatever else it is.
Carole Simpson : And you, too?
Bill Clinton : Ross had his hand up.
Carole Simpson : Yes.
Ross Perot : Just no hedges, no ifs, ands and buts.
Ross Perot : I'll take the pledge because I know the American people want to talk about issues and not tabloid journalism.
Ross Perot : So I'll take the pledge and will stay on the issues.
Ross Perot : Now, just for the record, I don't have any spin doctors.
Ross Perot : I don't have any speechwriters.
Ross Perot : Probably shows.
Ross Perot : I make those charts you see on television.
Ross Perot : But you don't have to wonder if it's me talking.
Ross Perot : See, what you see is what you get and if you don't like it, you got two other choices, right?
Bill Clinton : Wait a minute.
Bill Clinton : I want to say just one thing now, Ross, in fairness.
Bill Clinton : The ideas I express are mine.
Bill Clinton : I've worked on these things for 12 years and I'm the only person up here who hasn't been part of Washington in any way for the last 20 years.
Bill Clinton : So I don't want the implication to be that somehow everything we say is just cooked up and put in our head by somebody else.
Bill Clinton : I worked 12 years very hard as a governor on the real problems of real people.
Bill Clinton : I'm just as sick as you are by having to wake up and figure out how to defend myself every day.
Bill Clinton : I never thought I'd ever be involved in anything like this.
Ross Perot : May I finish?
Carole Simpson : Yes, you may finish.
Ross Perot : Very briefly?
Carole Simpson : Yes, very briefly.
Ross Perot : And I don't have any foreign money in my campaign.
Ross Perot : I don't have any foreign lobbyists on leave in my campaign.
Ross Perot : I don't have any PAC money in my campaign.
Ross Perot : I've got 5.5 million hard-working people who put me on the ballot, and I belong to them.
Ross Perot : And they're interested in what you're interested in.
Ross Perot : I take the pledge.
Ross Perot : I've already taken the pledge on cutting the deficit in half.
Ross Perot : I never got to say that.
Ross Perot : There's a great young group, Lead or Leave, college students, young people, who don't want us to spend their money.
Ross Perot : I took the pledge we'd cut it out.
Carole Simpson : Thank you.
Carole Simpson : We have a question here.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Yes.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : I would like to get a response from all three gentlemen.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : And the question is, what are your plans to improve the physical infrastructure of this nation, which includes the water system, the sewer system, our transportation systems, etcetera.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Thank you.
Carole Simpson : The cities.
Carole Simpson : Who's going to fix the cities and how?
George Bush : I'll be glad to take a shot at it.
Carole Simpson : Please.
George Bush : I'm not sure that -- and I can understand if you haven't seen this, because there's been a lot of hue and cry.
George Bush : We passed this year the most furthest looking transportation bill in the history of this country since Eisenhower started the interstate highways -- $150 billion for improving the infrastructure.
George Bush : That happened when I was president.
George Bush : And so I'm very proud of the way that came about and I think it's a very, very good beginning.
George Bush : Like Mr. Perot, I am concerned about the deficits and $150 billion is a lot of money, but it's awful hard to say we're going to go out and spend more money when we're trying to get the deficit down.
George Bush : But I would cite that as a major accomplishment.
George Bush : We hear all the negatives.
George Bush : When you're president you expect this.
George Bush : Everybody's running against the incumbent.
George Bush : They can do better.
George Bush : Everyone knows that.
George Bush : But here's something that we can take great pride in because it really does get to what you're talking about.
George Bush : Our home initiative -- our home ownership initiative -- HOPE -- that passed the Congress is a good start for having people own their own homes instead of living in these deadly tenements.
George Bush : Our enterprise zones, that we hear a lot of lip service about in Congress, would bring jobs into the inner city.
George Bush : There's a good program.
George Bush : And I need the help of everybody across this country to get it passed in a substantial way by the Congress.
George Bush : When we went out to south central in Los Angeles -- some of you may remember the riots there.
George Bush : I went out there.
George Bush : I went to a boys' club.
George Bush : And everyone of them -- the boys' club leaders, the ministers -- all of them were saying pass enterprise zones.
George Bush : We go back to Washington and very difficult to get it through the Congress.
George Bush : But there's going to be a new Congress.
George Bush : No one likes gridlock.
George Bush : There's going to be a new Congress because the old one -- I don't want to get this man made at me -- but there was a post office scandal and a bank scandal.
George Bush : You're going to have a lot of new members of Congress.
George Bush : And then you can sit down and say, help me do what we should for the cities.
George Bush : Help me pass these programs.
Carole Simpson : Mr. President, aren't you threatening to veto the bill -- the urban aid bill -- that included enterprise zones?
George Bush : Sure, but the problem is, you get so many things included in a great big bill that you have to look at the overall good.
George Bush : That's the problem with our system.
George Bush : If you had a line item veto you could knock out the pork.
George Bush : You could knock out the tax increases and you could do what the people want, and that's create enterprise zones.
Carole Simpson : Governor Clinton, you're chomping at the bit.
Bill Clinton : That bill pays for these urban enterprise zones by asking the wealthiest Americans to pay a little more.
Bill Clinton : And that's why he wants to veto it, just like he vetoed an earlier bill this year.
Bill Clinton : This is not mud slinging.
Bill Clinton : This is fact slinging -- a bill earlier this year.
Bill Clinton : This is facts -- that would have given investment tax credits and other incentives to reinvest in our cities, in our country.
Bill Clinton : But it asked the wealthiest Americans to pay a little more.
Bill Clinton : Mr. Perot wants to do the same thing.
Bill Clinton : I agree with him.
Bill Clinton : I mean, we agree with that.
Bill Clinton : But let me tell you specifically what my plan does.
Bill Clinton : My plan would dedicate $20 billion a year in each of the next 4 years for investments in new transportation, communications, environmental clean-ups and new technologies for the 21st century.
Bill Clinton : And we would target it especially in areas that have been either depressed or which have lost a lot of defense related jobs.
Bill Clinton : There are 200,000 people in California, for example, who have lost their defense related jobs.
Bill Clinton : They ought to be engaged in making high speed rail.
Bill Clinton : They ought to be engaged in breaking ground in other technologies, doing waste recycling, clean water technology and things of that kind.
Bill Clinton : We can create millions of jobs in these new technologies- -more than we're going to lose in defense -- if we target it.
Bill Clinton : But we're investing a much smaller percentage of our income in the things you just asked about than all of our major competitors, and our wealth growth is going down as a result of it.
Bill Clinton : It's making the country poorer, which is why I answered the gentleman the way I did before.
Bill Clinton : We have to both bring down the deficit and get our economy going through these kinds of investments in order to get the kind of wealth and jobs and incomes we need in America.
Carole Simpson : Mr. Perot, what about your plans for the cities?
Carole Simpson : You want to tackle the economy and the deficit first.
Ross Perot : First you've got to have money to pay for these things.
Ross Perot : So you've got to create jobs.
Ross Perot : There are all kinds of ways to create jobs in the inner city.
Ross Perot : I'm not a politician, but I think I could go to Washington in a week and get everybody holding hands and get this bill signed because I talk to the Democratic leaders and they want it.
Ross Perot : I talk to the Republican leaders and they want it.
Ross Perot : But since they're bred from childhood to fight with one another rather than get results, you know, I would be glad to drop out and spend a little time and see if we couldn't build some bridges.
Ross Perot : Now, results is what counts.
Ross Perot : The president can't order Congress around.
Ross Perot : Congress can't order the president around.
Ross Perot : That's not bad for a guy that's never been there, right?
Ross Perot : But you have to work together.
Ross Perot : Now, I have talked to the chairmen of the committees that want this.
Ross Perot : They're Democrats.
Ross Perot : The president wants it, but we can't get it because we sit here in gridlock because it's a campaign year.
Ross Perot : We didn't fund a lot of other things this year, like the savings and loan mess.
Ross Perot : That's another story that we're going to pay a big price for right after the election.
Ross Perot : The facts are though -- the facts are -- the American people are hurting.
Ross Perot : These people are hurting in the inner cities.
Ross Perot : "We're shipping the quote, ""low paying jobs"" overseas."
Ross Perot : What are low paying jobs?
Ross Perot : Textiles, shoes, things like that that we say are yesterday's industries.
Ross Perot : They're tomorrow's industries in the inner cities.
Ross Perot : Let me say in my case, if I'm out of work, I'll cut grass tomorrow to take care of my family; I'll be happy to make shoes, I'll be happy to make clothing, I'll make sausage.
Ross Perot : You just give me a job.
Ross Perot : Put those jobs in the inner cities instead of doing diplomatic deals and shipping them to China where prison labor does the work.
Carole Simpson : Mr. Perot, everybody thought you won the first debate because you were plain-speaking and you made it sound, oh, so simple.
Carole Simpson : Well, just do it.
Carole Simpson : What makes you think that you're going to be able to get the Democrats and Republicans together any better than these guys?
Ross Perot : If you ask me if I could fly a fighter plane or be an astronaut, I can't.
Ross Perot : I've spent my life creating jobs.
Ross Perot : That's something I know how to do.
Ross Perot : And, very simply, in the inner city, they're starved -- you see, small business is the way to jump start the inner city, not --
Carole Simpson : Are you answering my question?
Ross Perot : You want jobs in the inner city?
Ross Perot : Do you want jobs in the inner city?
Ross Perot : Is that your question?
Carole Simpson : No, I want you to tell me how you're going to be able to get the Republicans and Democrats in Congress to work together better than these two gentlemen.
Ross Perot : Oh, I'm sorry.
Ross Perot : Well, I've listened to both sides, and if they would talk to one another instead of throwing rocks, I think we could get a lot done.
Ross Perot : And, among other things, I would say, okay, over here in this Senate committee to the chairman who is anxious to get this bill passed, the president who is anxious, I'd say rather than just yelling at one another, why don't we find out where we're apart, try to get together, get the bill passed and give the people the benefits and not play party politics right now.
Ross Perot : And I think the press would follow that so closely that probably they would get it done.
Ross Perot : That's the way I would do it.
Ross Perot : I doubt if they'll give me the chance, but I will drop everything and go work on it.
Carole Simpson : Okay, I have a question here.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : My question was originally for Governor Clinton, but I think I would welcome a response from all three candidates.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : As you are aware, crime is rampant in our cities.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : And in the Richmond area -- and I'm sure it's happened elsewhere -- 12-year-olds are carrying guns to school.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : And I'm sure when our Founding Fathers wrote the Constitution they did not mean for the right to bear arms to apply to 12-year-olds.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : So I'm asking: Where do you stand on gun control, and what do you plan to do about it?
Carole Simpson : Governor Clinton?
Bill Clinton : I support the right to keep and bear arms.
Bill Clinton : I live in a state where over half the adults have hunting or fishing licenses, or both.
Bill Clinton : But I believe we have to have some way of checking hand guns before they're sold, to check the criminal history, the mental health history, and the age of people who are buying them.
Bill Clinton : Therefore I support the Brady bill which would impose a national waiting period unless and until a state did what only Virginia has done now, which is to automate its records.
Bill Clinton : Once you automate your records, then you don't have to have a waiting period, but at least you can check.
Bill Clinton : I also think we should have frankly restrictions on assault weapons whose only purpose is to kill.
Bill Clinton : We need to give the police a fighting chance in our urban areas where the gangs are building up.
Bill Clinton : The third thing I would say -- it doesn't bear directly on gun control, but it's very important -- we need more police on the street.
Bill Clinton : There is a crime bill which would put more police on the street, which was killed for this session by a filibuster in the Senate, mostly be Republican senators, and I think it's a shame it didn't pass, I think it should be made the law -- but it had the Brady bill in it, the waiting period.
Bill Clinton : I also believe that we should offer college scholarships to people who will agree to work them off as police officers, and I think, as we reduce our military forces, we should let people earn military retirement by coming out and working as police officers.
Bill Clinton : Thirty years ago there were three police officers on the street for every crime; today there are three crimes for every police officer.
Bill Clinton : In the communities which have had real success putting police officers near schools where kids carry weapons, to get the weapons out of the schools, are on the same blocks, you've seen crime go down.
Bill Clinton : In Houston there's been a 15- percent drop in the crime rate in the last year because of the work the mayor did there in increasing the police force.
Bill Clinton : So I know it can work; I've seen it happen.
Carole Simpson : Thank you.
Carole Simpson : President Bush?
George Bush : I think you put your finger on a major problem.
George Bush : I talk about strengthening the American family and it's very hard to strengthen the family if people are scared to walk down to the corner store and, you know, send their kid down to get a loaf of bread.
George Bush : It's very hard.
George Bush : I have been fighting for very strong anti-crime legislation -- habeas corpus reform, so you don't have these endless appeals, so when somebody gets sentenced, hey, this is for real.
George Bush : I've been fighting for changes in the exclusionary rule so if an honest cop stops somebody and makes a technical mistake, the criminal doesn't go away.
George Bush : I'll probably get into a fight in this room with some but I happen to think that we need stronger death penalties for those that kill police officers.
George Bush : Virginia's in the lead in this, as Governor Clinton properly said, on this identification system for firearms.
George Bush : I am not for national registration of firearms.
George Bush : Some of the states that have the toughest anti-gun laws have the highest levels of crime.
George Bush : I am for the right, as the governor says- -I'm a sportsman and I don't think you ought to eliminate all kinds of weapons.
George Bush : But I was not for the bill that he was talking about because it was not tough enough on the criminal.
George Bush : I'm very pleased that the Fraternal Order of Police in Little Rock, Arkansas endorsed me because I think they see I'm trying to strengthen the anti-crime legislation.
George Bush : We've got more money going out for local police than any previous administration.
George Bush : So we've got to get it under control and there's one last point I'd make.
George Bush : Drugs.
George Bush : We have got to win our national strategy against drugs, the fight against drugs.
George Bush : And we're making some progress, doing a little better on interdiction.
George Bush : We're not doing as well amongst the people that get to be habitual drug-users.
George Bush : The good news is, and I think it's true in Richmond, teenage use is down of cocaine, substantially, 60% in the last couple of years.
George Bush : So we're making progress but until we get that one done, we're not going to solve the neighborhood crime problem.
Carole Simpson : Mr. Perot, there are young black males in America dying at unprecedented rates --
Ross Perot : I didn't get to make a comment on this.
Carole Simpson : Yes, I'm getting to that.
Ross Perot : Oh, you're going to let me.
Ross Perot : Excuse me.
Carole Simpson : The fact that homicide is the leading cause of death among young black males 15 to 24 years old.
Carole Simpson : What are you going to do to get the guns off the street?
Ross Perot : On any program, and this includes crime, you'll find we have all kinds of great plans lying around that never get enacted into law and implemented.
Ross Perot : I don't care what it is -- competitiveness, health care, crime, you name it.
Ross Perot : Brady Bill, I agree that it's a timid step in the right direction but it won't fix it.
Ross Perot : So why pass a law that won't fix it?
Ross Perot : Now, what it really boils down to is can you live -- we become so preoccupied with the rights of the criminal that we've forgotten the rights of the innocent.
Ross Perot : And in our country we have evolved to a point where we've put millions of innocent people in jail because you go to the poor neighborhoods and they've put bars on their windows and bars on their doors and put themselves in jail to protect the things that they acquired legitimately.
Ross Perot : That's where we are.
Ross Perot : We have got to become more concerned about people who play by the rules and get the balance we require.
Ross Perot : This is going to take first, building a consensus at grassroots America.
Ross Perot : Right from the bottom up, the American people have got to say they want it.
Ross Perot : And at that point, we can pick from a variety of plans and develop new plans.
Ross Perot : And the way you get things done is bury yourselves in the room with one another, put together the best program, take it to the American people, use the electronic town hall, the kind of thing you're doing here tonight, build a consensus and then do it and then go on to the next one.
Ross Perot : But don't just sit here slow dancing for 4 years doing nothing.
Carole Simpson : Thank you.
Carole Simpson : Thank you, Mr. Perot.
Carole Simpson : We have a question up here.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Please state your position on term limits, and, if you are in favor of them, how will you get them enacted?
George Bush : Any order?
George Bush : I'll be glad to respond.
Carole Simpson : Thank you.
George Bush : I strongly support term limits for members of the US Congress.
George Bush : I believe it would return the government closer to the people, the way that Ross Perot is talking about.
George Bush : The president's terms are limited to 2, a total of 8 years.
George Bush : What's wrong with limiting the terms of members of Congress to 12?
George Bush : Congress has gotten kind of institutionalized.
George Bush : For 38 years one party has controlled the House of Representatives, and the result, a sorry little post office that can't do anything right and a bank that has more overdrafts than all the Chase Bank and Citibank put together.
George Bush : We've got to do something about it.
George Bush : And I think you get a certain arrogance, bureaucratic arrogance, if people stay there too long.
George Bush : And so I favor, strongly favor, term limits.
George Bush : And how to get them passed?
George Bush : Send us some people that will pass the idea.
George Bush : And I think you will.
George Bush : I think the American people want it now.
George Bush : Every place I go I talk about it, and I think they want it done.
George Bush : Actually, you'd have to have some amendments to the Constitution because of the way the Constitution reads.
Carole Simpson : Thank you.
Carole Simpson : Governor Clinton.
Bill Clinton : I know they're popular, but I'm against them.
Bill Clinton : I'll tell you why.
Bill Clinton : I believe, number one, it would pose a real problem for a lot of smaller states in the Congress who have enough trouble now making sure their interests are heard.
Bill Clinton : Number 2, I think it would increase the influence of unelected staff members in the Congress who have too much influence already.
Bill Clinton : I want to cut the size of the congressional staffs, but I think you're going to have too much influence there with people who were never elected, who have lots of expertise.
Bill Clinton : Number 3, if the people really have a mind to change, they can.
Bill Clinton : You're going to have 120 to 150 new members of Congress.
Bill Clinton : Now, let me tell you what I favor instead.
Bill Clinton : I favor strict controls on how much you can spend running for Congress, strict limits on political action committees, requirements that people running for Congress appear in open public debates like we're doing now.
Bill Clinton : If you did that you could take away the incumbents' advantage because challengers like me would have a chance to run against incumbents like him for House races and Senate races, and then the voters could make up their own mind without being subject to an unfair fight.
Bill Clinton : So that's how I feel about it, and I think if we had the right kind of campaign reform, we'd get the changes you want.
Carole Simpson : Mr. Perot, would you like to address term limitations?
Ross Perot : Yes.
Ross Perot : Let me do first on a personal level.
Ross Perot : If the American people send me up to do this job, I intend to be there one term.
Ross Perot : I do not intend to spend one minute of one day thinking about re-election.
Ross Perot : And as a matter of principle -- and my situation is unique, and I understand it -- I would take absolutely no compensation; I go as their servant.
Ross Perot : Now, I have set as strong an example as I can, then at that point when we sit down over at Capitol Hill -- tomorrow night I'm going to be talking about government reform -- it's a long subject, you wouldn't let me finish tonight.
Ross Perot : If you want to hear it, you get it tomorrow night -- you'll hear it tomorrow night.
Ross Perot : But we have got to reform government.
Ross Perot : If you put term limits in and don't reform government, you won't get the benefits you thought.
Ross Perot : It takes both.
Ross Perot : So we need to do the reforms and the term limits.
Ross Perot : And after we reform it, it won't be a lifetime career opportunity; good people will go serve and then go back to their homes and not become foreign lobbyists and cash in at 30,000 bucks a month and then take time off to run some president's campaign.
Ross Perot : They're all nice people, they're just in a bad system.
Ross Perot : I don't think there are any villains, but, boy, is the system rotten.
Carole Simpson : Thank you very much.
Carole Simpson : We have a question over here.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : I'd like to ask Governor Clinton, do you attribute the rising costs of health care to the medical profession itself, or do you think the problem lies elsewhere?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : And what specific proposals do you have to tackle this problem?
Bill Clinton : I've had more people talk to me about their health care problems I guess than anything else, all across America -- you know, people who've lost their jobs, lost their businesses, had to give up their jobs because of sick children.
Bill Clinton : So let me try to answer you in this way.
Bill Clinton : Let's start with a premise.
Bill Clinton : We spend 30% more of our income than any nation on earth on health care, and yet we insure fewer people.
Bill Clinton : We have 35 million people without any insurance at all -- and I see them all the time.
Bill Clinton : A hundred thousand Americans a month have lost their health insurance just in the last 4 years.
Bill Clinton : So if you analyze where we're out of line with other countries, you come up with the following conclusions.
Bill Clinton : Number one, we spend at least $60 billion a year on insurance, administrative cost, bureaucracy, and government regulation that wouldn't be spent in any other nation.
Bill Clinton : So we have to have, in my judgment, a drastic simplification of the basic health insurance policies of this country, be very comprehensive for everybody.
Bill Clinton : Employers would cover their employees, government would cover the unemployed.
Bill Clinton : Number 2, I think you have to take on specifically the insurance companies and require them to make some significant change in the way they rate people in the big community pools.
Bill Clinton : I think you have to tell the pharmaceutical companies they can't keep raising drug prices at three times the rate of inflation.
Bill Clinton : I think you have to take on medical fraud.
Bill Clinton : I think you have to help doctors stop practicing defensive medicine.
Bill Clinton : I've recommended that our doctors be given a set of national practice guidelines and that if they follow those guidelines that raises the presumption that they didn't do anything wrong.
Bill Clinton : I think you have to have a system of primary and preventive clinics in our inner cities and our rural areas so people can have access to health care.
Bill Clinton : The key is to control the cost and maintain the quality.
Bill Clinton : To do that you need a system of managed competition where all of us are covered in big groups and we can choose our doctors and our hospitals, a wide range, but there is an incentive to control costs.
Bill Clinton : And I think there has to be -- I think Mr. Perot and I agree on this, there has to be a national commission of health care providers and health care consumers that set ceilings to keep health costs in line with inflation, plus population growth.
Bill Clinton : Now, let me say, some people say we can't do this but Hawaii does it.
Bill Clinton : They cover 98% of their people and their insurance premiums are much cheaper than the rest of America, and so does Rochester, New York.
Bill Clinton : They now have a plan to cover everybody and their premiums are two-thirds of the rest of the country.
Bill Clinton : This is very important.
Bill Clinton : It's a big human problem and a devastating economic problem for America, and I'm going to send a plan to do this within the first 100 days of my presidency.
Bill Clinton : It's terribly important.
Carole Simpson : Thank you.
Carole Simpson : Sorry to cut you short but President Bush, health care reform.
George Bush : I just have to say something.
George Bush : I don't want to stampede.
George Bush : Ross was very articulate across the country.
George Bush : I don't want anybody to stampede to cut the president's salary off altogether.
George Bush : Barbara's sitting over here and I -- but what I have proposed, 10% cut, downsize the government, and we can get that done.
George Bush : She asked a question, I think, is whether the health care profession was to blame.
George Bush : No.
George Bush : One thing to blame is these malpractice lawsuits.
George Bush : They're breaking the system.
George Bush : It costs $20-25 billion a year, and I want to see those outrageous claims capped.
George Bush : Doctors don't dare to deliver babies sometimes because they're afraid that somebody's going to sue them.
George Bush : People don't dare -- medical practitioners, to help somebody along the highway that are hurt because they're afraid that some lawyer's going to come along and get a big lawsuit.
George Bush : So you can't blame the practitioners for the health problem.
George Bush : And my program is this.
George Bush : Keep the government as far out of it as possible, make insurance available to the poorest of the poor, through vouchers, next range in the income bracket, through tax credits, and get on about the business of pooling insurance.
George Bush : A great big company can buy -- Ross has got a good-sized company, been very successful.
George Bush : He can buy insurance cheaper than Mom and Pop's store on the corner.
George Bush : But if those Mom and Pop stores all get together and pool, they too can bring the cost of insurance down.
George Bush : So I want to keep the quality of health care.
George Bush : That means keep government out of it.
George Bush : I want to do -- I don't like this idea of these boards.
George Bush : It all sounds to me like you're going to have some government setting price.
George Bush : I want competition and I want to pool the insurance and take care of it that way and have -- oh, here's the other point.
George Bush : I think medical care should go with the person.
George Bush : If you leave a business, I think your insurance should go with you to some other business.
George Bush : You shouldn't be worrying if you get a new job as to whether that's gonna -- and part of our plan is to make it what they call portable -- big word, but that means if you're working for the Jones Company and you go to the Smith Company, your insurance goes with you.
George Bush : I think it's a good program.
George Bush : I'm really excited about getting it done, too.
Carole Simpson : Mr. Perot.
Ross Perot : We have the most expensive health care system in the world.
Ross Perot : Twelve percent of our gross national product goes to health care.
Ross Perot : Our industrial competitors, who are beating us in competition, spend less and have better health care.
Ross Perot : Japan spends a little over 6% of its gross national product.
Ross Perot : Germany spends 8%.
Ross Perot : It's fascinating.
Ross Perot : You've bought a front row box seat and you're not happy with your health care and you're saying tonight we've got bad health care but very expensive health care.
Ross Perot : Folks, here's why.
Ross Perot : Go home and look in the mirror.
Ross Perot : You own this country but you have no voice in it the way it's organized now, and if you want to have a high risk experience, comparable to bungee jumping, go into Congress some time when they're working on this kind of legislation, when the lobbyists are running up and down the halls.
Ross Perot : Wear your safety toe shoes when you go.
Ross Perot : And as a private citizen, believe me, you are looked on as a major nuisance.
Ross Perot : The facts are you now have a government that comes at you.
Ross Perot : You're supposed to have a government that comes from you.
Ross Perot : Now, there are all kinds of good ideas, brilliant ideas, terrific ideas on health care.
Ross Perot : None of them ever get implemented because -- let me give you an example.
Ross Perot : A senator runs every 6 years.
Ross Perot : He's got to raise 20,000 bucks a week to have enough money to run.
Ross Perot : Who's he gonna listen to -- us or the folks running up and down the aisles with money, the lobbyists, the PAC money?
Ross Perot : He listens to them.
Ross Perot : Who do they represent?
Ross Perot : Health care industry.
Ross Perot : Not us.
Ross Perot : Now, you've got to have a government that comes from you again.
Ross Perot : You've got to reassert your ownership in this country and you've got to completely reform our government.
Ross Perot : And at that point they'll just be like apples falling out of a tree.
Ross Perot : The programs will be good because the elected officials will be listening to -- I said the other night I was all ears and I would listen to any good idea.
Ross Perot : I think we ought to do plastic surgery on a lot of these guys so that they're all ears, too, and listen to you.
Ross Perot : Then you get what you want, and shouldn't you?
Ross Perot : You paid for it.
Ross Perot : Why shouldn't you get what you want, as opposed to what some lobbyist cuts a deal, writes a little piece in the law and he goes through.
Ross Perot : That's the way the game's played now.
Ross Perot : Till you change it you're gonna be unhappy.
Carole Simpson : You wanted one brief point in there.
Bill Clinton : One brief point.
Bill Clinton : We have elections so people can make decisions about this.
Bill Clinton : The point I want to make to you is, a bipartisan commission reviewed my plan and the Bush plan and there were as many Republicans as Democratic health care experts on it.
Bill Clinton : They concluded that my plan would cover everybody and his would leave 27 million behind by the year 2000 and that my plan in the next 12 years would save $2.2 trillion in public and private money to reinvest in this economy and the average family would save $1200 a year under the plan that I offered without any erosion in the quality of health care
Bill Clinton : So I ask you to look at that.
Bill Clinton : And you have to vote for somebody with a plan.
Bill Clinton : That's what you have elections for.
Bill Clinton : If people would say, well, he got elected to do this and then the Congress says, okay, I'm going to do it.
Bill Clinton : That's what the election was about.
Carole Simpson : Brief, Governor Clinton.
Carole Simpson : Thank you.
Carole Simpson : We have a question right here.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Yes.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : How has the national debt personally affected each of your lives?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : And if it hasn't, how can you honestly find a cure for the economic problems of the common people if you have no experience in what's ailing them?
Ross Perot : May I answer that?
Carole Simpson : Well, Mr. Perot -- yes, of course.
Ross Perot : Who do you want to start with?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : My question is for each of you, so-
Ross Perot : It caused me to disrupt my private life and my business to get involved in this activity.
Ross Perot : That's how much I care about it.
Ross Perot : And believe me, if you knew my family and if you knew the private life I have, you would agree in a minute that that's a whole lot more fun than getting involved in politics.
Ross Perot : But I have lived the American dream.
Ross Perot : I came from very modest background.
Ross Perot : Nobody's been luckier than I've been, all the way across the spectrum, and the greatest riches of all are my wife and children.
Ross Perot : That's true of any family.
Ross Perot : But I want all the children -- I want these young people up here to be able to start with nothing but an idea like I did and build a business.
Ross Perot : But they've got to have a strong basic economy and if you're in debt, it's like having a ball and chain around you.
Ross Perot : I just figure, as lucky as I've been, I owe it to them and I owe it to the future generations and on a very personal basis, I owe it to my children and grandchildren.
Carole Simpson : Thank you, Mr. Perot.
Carole Simpson : Mr. President.
George Bush : Well, I think the national debt affects everybody.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : You personally.
George Bush : Obviously it has a lot to do with interest rates --
Carole Simpson : "She's saying, ""you personally"""
AUDIENCE MEMBER : You, on a personal basis -- how has it affected you?
Carole Simpson : Has it affected you personally?
George Bush : I'm sure it has.
George Bush : I love my grandchildren --
AUDIENCE MEMBER : How?
George Bush : I want to think that they're going to be able to afford an education.
George Bush : I think that that's an important part of being a parent.
George Bush : If the question -- maybe I -- get it wrong.
George Bush : Are you suggesting that if somebody has means that the national debt doesn't affect them?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : What I'm saying is --
George Bush : I'm not sure I get -- help me with the question and I'll try to answer it.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Well, I've had friends that have been laid off from jobs.
George Bush : Yeah.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : I know people who cannot afford to pay the mortgage on their homes, their car payment.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : I have personal problems with the national debt.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : But how has it affected you and if you have no experience in it, how can you help us, if you don't know what we're feeling?
Carole Simpson : I think she means more the recession -- the economic problems today the country faces rather than the deficit.
George Bush : Well, listen, you ought to be in the White House for a day and hear what I hear and see what I see and read the mail I read and touch the people that I touch from time to time.
George Bush : I was in the Lomax AME Church.
George Bush : It's a black church just outside of Washington, DC.
George Bush : And I read in the bulletin about teenage pregnancies, about the difficulties that families are having to make ends meet.
George Bush : I talk to parents.
George Bush : I mean, you've got to care.
George Bush : Everybody cares if people aren't doing well.
George Bush : But I don't think it's fair to say, you haven't had cancer.
George Bush : Therefore, you don't know what's it like.
George Bush : I don't think it's fair to say, you know, whatever it is, that if you haven't been hit by it personally.
George Bush : But everybody's affected by the debt because of the tremendous interest that goes into paying on that debt everything's more expensive.
George Bush : Everything comes out of your pocket and my pocket.
George Bush : So it's that.
George Bush : But I think in terms of the recession, of course you feel it when you're president of the US.
George Bush : And that's why I'm trying to do something about it by stimulating the export, vesting more, better education systems.
George Bush : Thank you.
George Bush : I'm glad you clarified it.
Carole Simpson : Governor Clinton.
Bill Clinton : Tell me how it's affected you again.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Um --
Bill Clinton : You know people who've lost their jobs and lost their homes?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Well, yeah, uh-huh.
Bill Clinton : Well, I've been governor of a small state for 12 years.
Bill Clinton : I'll tell you how it's affected me.
Bill Clinton : Every year Congress and the president sign laws that make us do more things and gives us less money to do it with.
Bill Clinton : I see people in my state, middle class people -- their taxes have gone up in Washington and their services have gone down while the wealthy have gotten tax cuts.
Bill Clinton : I have seen what's happened in this last 4 years when -- in my state, when people lose their jobs there's a good chance I'll know them by their names.
Bill Clinton : When a factory closes, I know the people who ran it.
Bill Clinton : When the businesses go bankrupt, I know them.
Bill Clinton : And I've been out here for 13 months meeting in meetings just like this ever since October, with people like you all over America, people that have lost their jobs, lost their livelihood, lost their health insurance.
Bill Clinton : What I want you to understand is the national debt is not the only cause of that.
Bill Clinton : It is because America has not invested in its people.
Bill Clinton : It is because we have not grown.
Bill Clinton : It is because we've had 12 years of trickle down economics.
Bill Clinton : We've gone from first to twelfth in the world in wages.
Bill Clinton : We've had 4 years where we've produced no private sector jobs.
Bill Clinton : Most people are working harder for less money than they were making ten years ago.
Bill Clinton : It is because we are in the grip of a failed economic theory.
Bill Clinton : And this decision you're about to make better be about what kind of economic theory you want, not just people saying I'm going to go fix it but what are we going to do?
Bill Clinton : I think we have to do is invest in American jobs, American education, control American health care costs and bring the American people together again.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Thank you.
Carole Simpson : Thank you, Governor Clinton.
Carole Simpson : We are a little more than halfway through this program and I'm glad we're getting the diversity of questions that we are, and I don't want to forget these folks on the wings over here so let's go over here.
Carole Simpson : Do you have a question?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Yes, I do.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : My name is Ben Smith.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : I work in the financial field, counseling retirees, and I'm personally concerned about three major areas.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : One is the Social Security Administration or trust fund is projected to be insolvent by the year 2036.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : And we funded the trust fund with IOUs in the form of Treasury bonds.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : The Pension Guarantee Fund, which backs up our private retirement plans for retirees, is projected to be bankrupt by the year 2026, not to mention the cutbacks by private companies.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : And Medicare is projected to be bankrupt maybe as soon as 1997.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : And I would like from each of you a specific response as to what you intend to do for retirees relative to these issues, not generalities but specifics because I think they're very disturbing issues.
Carole Simpson : President Bush, may we start with you?
George Bush : Well, the Social Security -- you're an expert and I could, I'm sure, learn from you the details of the Pension Guarantee Fund and the Social Security Fund.
George Bush : The Social Security system was fixed about 5 years, and I think it's projected out to be sound beyond that.
George Bush : So at least we have time to work with it.
George Bush : But on all of these things, a sound economy is the only way to get it going.
George Bush : Growth in the economy is gonna add to the overall prosperity and wealth.
George Bush : I can't give you a specific answer on Pension Guarantee Fund.
George Bush : All I know is that we have firm government credit to guarantee the pensions.
George Bush : And that is very important.
George Bush : But it's -- the full faith and credit of the US, in spite of our difficulties, is still pretty good.
George Bush : It's still the most respected credit.
George Bush : So I would simply say, as these dates get close, you're going to have to reorganize and refix as we did with the Social Security Fund.
George Bush : And I think that's the only answer.
George Bush : But the more immediate answer is to do what this lady was suggesting we do, and that is to get this deficit down and get on without adding to the woes, and then restructure.
George Bush : One thing I've called for that has been stymied, and I'll keep on working for it, is a whole financial reform legislation.
George Bush : It is absolutely essential in terms of bringing our banking system and credit system into the new age instead of having it living back in the dark ages.
George Bush : And it's a big fight.
George Bush : And I don't want to give my friend Ross another shot at me here but I am fighting with the Congress to get this through.
George Bush : And you can't just go up and say I'm going to fix it.
George Bush : You've got some pretty strong-willed guys up there that argue with you.
George Bush : But that's what the election's about.
George Bush : I agree with the governor.
George Bush : That's what the election's about.
George Bush : And sound fiscal policy is the best answer, I think, to all the three problems you mentioned.
Carole Simpson : Thank you.
Carole Simpson : Mr. Perot.
Ross Perot : On the broad issue here, when you're trying to solve a problem, you get the best plans.
Ross Perot : You have a raging debate about those plans.
Ross Perot : Then out of that debate, with leadership, comes consensus.
Ross Perot : Then, if the plans are huge and complex like health care, I would urge you to implement pilot programs.
Ross Perot : Like the old carpenter says measure twice, cut once.
Ross Perot : Let's make sure this thing's as good as we all think it is at the end of the meeting.
Ross Perot : Then finally, our government passes laws and freezes the plan in concrete.
Ross Perot : Anybody that's ever built a successful business will tell you you optimize, optimize, optimize after you've put something into effect.
Ross Perot : The reason Medicare and Medicaid are a mess is we froze them.
Ross Perot : Everybody knows how to fix them.
Ross Perot : There are people all over the federal government, if they could just touch it with a screwdriver, could fix it.
Ross Perot : Now, back over here.
Ross Perot : See, we've got a $4 trillion debt and only in America would you have $2.8 trillion of it or 70% of it financed 5 years or less.
Ross Perot : Now, that's another thing for you to think about when you go home tonight.
Ross Perot : You don't finance long-term debt with short-term money.
Ross Perot : Why did our government do it?
Ross Perot : To get the interest rates down.
Ross Perot : A 1% increase in interest rates in that $2.8 trillion is $28 billion a year.
Ross Perot : Now, when you look at what Germany pays for money and what we don't pay for money, you realize there's quite a spread, right, and you realize this is a temporary thing and there's going to be another sucking sound that runs our deficit through the roof.
Ross Perot : You know, and everybody's ducking it so I'm gonna say it, that we are not letting that surplus stay in the bank.
Ross Perot : We are not investing that surplus like a pension fund.
Ross Perot : We are spending that surplus to make the deficit look smaller to you than it really is.
Ross Perot : Now, that -- put you in jail in corporate America if you kept books that way but in government it's just kind of the way things are.
Ross Perot : That's because it comes at you, not from you.
Ross Perot : Now then, that money needs to be -- they don't even pay interest on it.
Ross Perot : They just write a note for the interest.
Carole Simpson : Mr. Perot, can you wrap it up?
Ross Perot : Do you want to fix the problem or sound-bite it?
Ross Perot : I understand the importance of time but see, here's how we get to this mess we're in.
Carole Simpson : But we've got to be fair.
Ross Perot : This is just 1 of 1000.
Ross Perot : Now then, to nail it, there's one way out -- a growing, expanding job base.
Ross Perot : A growing, expanding job base to generate the funds and the tax revenues to pay off the mess and rebuild America.
Ross Perot : We've got to double-hit.
Ross Perot : If we're $4 trillion down, we should have everything perfect, but we don't.
Ross Perot : We've got to pay it off and build money to renew it- -spend money to renew it, and that's going to take a growing, expanding job base.
Ross Perot : That is priority one in this country.
Ross Perot : Put everybody that's breathing to work.
Ross Perot : And I'd love to be out of workers and have to import them, like some of our international competitors.
Carole Simpson : Mr. Perot, I'm sorry.
Carole Simpson : I'm going to --
Ross Perot : Sorry.
Carole Simpson : And I don't want to sound-bite you but we are trying to be fair --
Ross Perot : Okay.
Carole Simpson : -- to everyone.
Ross Perot : Absolutely.
Ross Perot : I apologize.
Carole Simpson : All right.
Carole Simpson : Governor Clinton.
Bill Clinton : I think I remember the question.
Bill Clinton : (Laughter.)
Bill Clinton : Let me say first of all, I want to answer your specific question but first of all, we all agree that there should be a growing economy.
Bill Clinton : What you have to decide is who's got the best economic plan.
Bill Clinton : And we all have ideas out there, and Mr. Bush has a record.
Bill Clinton : So I don't want you to read my lips and I sure don't want you to read his.
Bill Clinton : I do hope you will read our plans.
Bill Clinton : Now, specifically, one, on Medicare, it is not true that everyone knows how to fix it.
Bill Clinton : There are different ideas -- the Bush plan, the Perot plan, the Clinton -- we have different ideas.
Bill Clinton : I am convinced, having studied health care for a year hard and talking to hundreds and hundreds of people all across America, that you cannot control the cost of Medicare until you control the cost of private health care and public health care, with managed competition, ceiling on cost, and radical reorganization of the insurance markets.
Bill Clinton : You've got to do that; we got to get those costs down.
Bill Clinton : Number 2, with regard to Social Security, that program -- a lot of you may not know this -- it produces a $70 billion surplus a year.
Bill Clinton : Social Security is in surplus $70 billion.
Bill Clinton : Six increases in the payroll tax -- that means people with incomes of $51,000 a year or less pay a disproportionally high share of the federal tax burden, which is why I want some middle-class tax relief.
Bill Clinton : What do we have to do?
Bill Clinton : By the time the century turns, we have got to have our deficit under control, we have to work out of so that surplus is building up so when the baby boomers like me retire, we're okay.
Bill Clinton : Number 3, on the pension funds, I don't know as much about it, but I will say this.
Bill Clinton : What I would do is to bring in the pension experts of the country, take a look at it, and strengthen the pension requirements further, because it's not just enough to have the guarantee.
Bill Clinton : We had a guarantee on the S&Ls, right?
Bill Clinton : We had a guarantee -- and what happened?
Bill Clinton : You picked up a $500-billion bill because of the dumb way the federal government deregulated it.
Bill Clinton : So I think we are going to have to change and strengthen the pension requirements on private retirement plans.
Carole Simpson : Thank you.
Carole Simpson : I think we have a question here on international affairs, hopefully.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : We've come to a position where we're in the new world order, and I'd like to know what the candidates feel our position is in this new world order, and what our responsibilities are as a superpower?
Carole Simpson : Mr. President.
George Bush : Well, we have come to that position.
George Bush : Since I became president, 43, 44 countries have gone democratic, no longer totalitarian, no longer living under dictatorship or communist rule.
George Bush : This is exciting.
George Bush : New world order to me means freedom and democracy.
George Bush : I think we will have a continuing responsibility, as the only remaining superpower, to stay involved.
George Bush : If we pull back in some isolation and say we don't have to do our share, or more than our share, anymore, I believe you are going to just ask for conflagration that we'll get involved in the future.
George Bush : NATO, for example, has kept the peace for many, many years, and I want to see us keep fully staffed in NATO so we'll continue to guarantee the peace in Europe.
George Bush : But the exciting thing is, the fear of nuclear war is down.
George Bush : And you hear all the bad stuff that's happened on my watch; I hope people will recognize that this is something pretty good for mankind.
George Bush : I hope they'll think it's good that democracy and freedom is on the move.
George Bush : And we're going to stay engaged, as long as I'm president, working to improve things.
George Bush : You know, it's so easy now to say, hey, cut out foreign aid, we got a problem at home.
George Bush : I think the US has to still have the Statue of Liberty as a symbol, caring for others.
George Bush : Right this very minute we're sending supplies in to help these little starving kids in Somalia.
George Bush : It's the US that's taken the lead in humanitarian aid into Bosnia.
George Bush : We're doing this all around the world.
George Bush : Yes, we got problems at home.
George Bush : And I think I got a good plan to help fix those problems at home.
George Bush : But because of our leadership, because we didn't listen to the freeze -- the nuclear-freeze group, do you remember -- freeze it, back in the late 70s -- freeze, don't touch it; we're going to lock it in now or else we'll have war.
George Bush : President Reagan said no, peace through strength.
George Bush : It worked.
George Bush : The Soviet Union is no more, and now we're working to help them become totally democratic through the Freedom Support Act that I led on, a great Democratic ambassador, Bob Strauss, over there, Jim Baker, all of us got this thing passed -- through cooperation, Ross -- it worked with cooperation, and you're for that, I'm sure, helping Russia become democratic.
George Bush : So the new world order to me means freedom and democracy, keep engaged, do not pull back into isolation.
George Bush : And we are the US, and we have a responsibility to lead and to guarantee the security.
George Bush : If it hadn't been for us, Saddam Hussein would be sitting on top of three-fifths of the oil supply of the world and he'd have nuclear weapons.
George Bush : And only the US could do this.
George Bush : Excuse me, Carole.
Carole Simpson : Thank you.
Carole Simpson : Mr. Perot.
Ross Perot : Well, it's cost-effective to help Russia succeed in its revolution; it's pennies on the dollar compared to going back to the Cold War.
Ross Perot : Russia is still very unstable; they could go back to square one, and worse.
Ross Perot : All the nuclear weapons are not dismantled.
Ross Perot : I am particularly concerned about the intercontinental weapons, the ones that can hit us.
Ross Perot : We've got agreements, but they are still there.
Ross Perot : With all this instability and breaking into republics, and all the Middle Eastern countries going over there and shopping for weapons, we've got our work cut out for us.
Ross Perot : So we need to stay right on top of that and constructively help them move toward democracy and capitalism.
Ross Perot : We have to have money to do that.
Ross Perot : We have to have our people at work.
Ross Perot : See, for 45 years we were preoccupied with the Red Army.
Ross Perot : I suggest now that our number one preoccupation is red ink and our country and we've got to put our people back to work so that we can afford to do these things we want to do in Russia.
Ross Perot : We cannot be the policeman for the world any longer.
Ross Perot : We spent $300 billion a year defending the world.
Ross Perot : Germany and Japan spend around $30 billion a piece.
Ross Perot : If I can get you to defend me and I can spend all my money building industry that's a home run for me.
Ross Perot : Coming out of World War II it made sense.
Ross Perot : Now, the other superpowers need to do their part.
Ross Perot : I'll close on this point.
Ross Perot : You can't be a superpower unless you're an economic superpower.
Ross Perot : If we're not an economic superpower, we're a used to be and we will no longer be a force for good throughout the world.
Ross Perot : And if nothing else gets you excited about rebuilding our industrial base maybe that will because job one is to put our people back to work.
Carole Simpson : Governor Clinton, the president mentioned Saddam Hussein.
Carole Simpson : Your vice president and you have had some words about the president and Saddam Hussein.
Carole Simpson : Would you care to comment?
Bill Clinton : I'd rather answer her question first and then I'll be glad to.
Bill Clinton : Because the question you ask is important.
Bill Clinton : The end of the Cold War brings an incredible opportunity for change.
Bill Clinton : Winds of freedom blowing around the world, Russia demilitarizing.
Bill Clinton : And it also requires us to maintain some continuity -- some bipartisan American commitment to certain principles.
Bill Clinton : And I would just say there are three things that I would like to say -- number one -- we do have to maintain the world's strongest defense.
Bill Clinton : We may differ about what the elements of that are.
Bill Clinton : I think that defense needs to be -- with fewer people in permanent armed services but with greater mobility on the land, in the air and on the sea, with a real dedication to continuing development of high technology weaponry and well trained people.
Bill Clinton : I think we're going to have to work to stop the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Bill Clinton : Got to keep going until all those nuclear weapons in Russia are gone and the other republics.
Bill Clinton : Number 2, if you don't rebuild the economic strength of this country at home, we won't be a superpower.
Bill Clinton : We can't have any more instances like what happened when Mr. Bush went to Japan and the Japanese prime minister said he felt sympathy for our country.
Bill Clinton : We have to be the strongest economic power in the world.
Bill Clinton : That's what got me into this race, so we could rebuild the American economy.
Bill Clinton : And number three, we need to be a force for freedom and democracy and we need to use our unique position to support freedom, whether it's in Haiti or in China or in any other place, wherever the seeds of freedom are sprouting.
Bill Clinton : We can't impose it, but we need to nourish it and that's the kind of thing that I would do as president -- follow those three commitments into the future.
Carole Simpson : Okay.
Carole Simpson : We have a question up there.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Yes.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : We've talked a lot tonight about creating jobs.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : But we have an awful lot of high school graduates who don't know how to read a ruler, who cannot fill out an application for a job.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : How can we create high paying jobs with the education system we have and what would you do to change it?
Carole Simpson : Who would like to begin -- the education president?
Ross Perot : Go ahead, sir.
Ross Perot : Yeah, go ahead.
George Bush : I'd be delighted to, because you can't do it the old way.
George Bush : You can't do it with the school bureaucracy controlling everything and that's why we have a new program that I hope people have heard about.
George Bush : It's being worked now in 1700 communities -- bypassed Congress on this one, Ross -- 1700 communities across the country.
George Bush : It's called America 2000.
George Bush : And it literally says to the communities, re-invent the schools, not just the bricks and mortar but the curriculum and everything else.
George Bush : Think anew.
George Bush : We have a concept called the New American School Corporation where we're doing exactly that.
George Bush : And so I believe that we've got to get the power in the hands of the teachers, not the teachers' union.
George Bush : What's happening up there?
George Bush : (Laughter) And so our America 2000 program also says this.
George Bush : It says let's give parents the choice of a public, private or public school -- public, private or religious school.
George Bush : And it works- -it works in Milwaukee.
George Bush : Democratic woman up there -- taking the lead in this.
George Bush : The mayor up there, on the program.
George Bush : And the schools that are not chosen are improved -- competition does that.
George Bush : So we've got to innovate through school choice.
George Bush : We've got to innovate through this America 2000 program.
George Bush : But she is absolutely right.
George Bush : The programs that we've been trying where you control everything and mandate it from Washington don't work.
George Bush : The governors -- and I believe Governor Clinton was in on this -- but maybe -- I don't want to invoke him here.
George Bush : But they come to me and they say, please get the Congress to stop passing so many mandates telling us how to control things.
George Bush : We know better how to do it in California or Texas or wherever it is.
George Bush : So this is what our program is all about.
George Bush : And I believe you're right on to something, that if we don't change the education we're not going to be able to compete.
George Bush : Federal funding for education is up substantially -- Pell grants are up.
George Bush : But it isn't going to get the job done if we don't change K through 12.
Carole Simpson : Governor Clinton.
Bill Clinton : First of all, let me say that I've spent more of my time and life on this in the last 12 years than any other issue.
Bill Clinton : Seventy percent of my state's money goes to the public schools, and I was really honored when Time magazine said that our schools have shown more improvement than any other state in the country except one other -- they named 2 states showing real strides forward in the 80s.
Bill Clinton : So I care a lot about this, and I've spent countless hours in schools.
Bill Clinton : But let me start with what you said.
Bill Clinton : I agree with some of what Mr. Bush said, but it's nowhere near enough.
Bill Clinton : We live in a world where what you earn depends on what you can learn, where the average 18- year-old will change jobs 8 times in a lifetime and where none of us can promise any of you that what you now do for a living is absolutely safe from now on.
Bill Clinton : Nobody running can promise that, there's too much change in the world.
Bill Clinton : So what should we do?
Bill Clinton : Let me reel some things off real quick, because you said you wanted specifics.
Bill Clinton : Number one, under my program we would provide matching funds to states to teach everybody with a job to read in the next 5 years and give everybody with a job the chance to get a high school diploma, in big places on the job.
Bill Clinton : Number 2, we would provide 2-year apprenticeship programs to high school graduates who don't go to college.
Bill Clinton : And community colleges are on the job.
Bill Clinton : Number three, we'd open the doors to college education to high school graduates without regard to income.
Bill Clinton : They could borrow the money and pay it back as a percentage of their income or with a couple of years of service to our nation here at home.
Bill Clinton : Number 4, we would fully fund the Head Start program to get little kids off to a good start.
Bill Clinton : And, 5, I would have an aggressive program of school reform, more choices -- I favor public schools or these new charter schools -- we can talk about that if you want.
Bill Clinton : I don't think we should spend tax money on private schools.
Bill Clinton : But I favor public school choice, and I favor radical decentralization in giving more power to better-trained principals and teachers with parent councils to control their schools.
Bill Clinton : Those things would revolutionize American education and take us to the top economically.
Carole Simpson : Thank you, Governor Clinton.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : What are they going to cost?
Carole Simpson : The question is, what is it going to cost?
Carole Simpson : What is it going to cost?
Bill Clinton : In 6 years -- I budget all this in my budget, and in 6 years the college program would cost 8 billion dollars over and above what -- the present student loan program costs 4; you pay 3 billion dollars for busted loans, because we don't have an automatic recovery system, and a billion dollars in bank fees.
Bill Clinton : So the net cost would be 8 billion 6 years from now in a trillion-plus budget -- not very much.
Bill Clinton : The other stuff -- all the other stuff I mentioned -- costs much less than that.
Bill Clinton : The Head Start program full funding would cost about 5 billion more.
Bill Clinton : And it's all covered in my budget from -- the plans that I've laid out -- from raising taxes on families with incomes above $200,000 and asking foreign corporations to pay the same tax that American corporations do on the same income, from $140 billion in budget cuts, including what I think are very prudent cuts in the defense budget.
Bill Clinton : It's all covered in the plan.
Carole Simpson : Thank you.
Carole Simpson : Mr. Perot, you on education, please.
Ross Perot : Yes, I've got scars to show for being around education reform.
Ross Perot : And the first word you need to say in every city and state, and just draw a line in the sand, is public schools exist for the benefit of the children.
Ross Perot : You're going to see a lot of people fall over it, because any time you're spending $199 billion dollars a year, somebody's getting it.
Ross Perot : And the children get lost in the process.
Ross Perot : So that's step one.
Ross Perot : Keep in mind in 1960, when our schools were the envy of the world, we were spending $16 billion on them; now we spend more than any other nation in the world -- 199 billion a year -- and rank at the bottom of the industrialized world in terms of education achievement.
Ross Perot : One more time you've bought a front-row box seat and got a third-rate performance.
Ross Perot : This is a government that is not serving you.
Ross Perot : By and large it should be local -- the more local, the better.
Ross Perot : Interesting phenomenon: small towns have good schools, big cities have terrible schools.
Ross Perot : The best people in a small town will serve on the school board; you get into big cities, it's political patronage, stepping stones -- you get the job, give your relatives a janitor's job at $57,000 a year, more than the teachers make, and with luck they clean the cafeteria once a week.
Ross Perot : Now, you're paying for that.
Ross Perot : Those schools belong to you.
Ross Perot : And we put up with that.
Ross Perot : Now, as long as we put up with that, that's what you're going to get.
Ross Perot : And these folks are just dividing up 199 billion bucks and the children get lost.
Ross Perot : If I could wish for one thing for great public schools, it would be a strong family unit in every home -- nothing will ever replace that.
Ross Perot : You say, well, gee, what are you going to do about that?
Ross Perot : Well, the White House is a bully pulpit, and I think we ought to be pounding on the table every day.
Ross Perot : There's nothing -- the most efficient unit of government the world will ever know is a strong loving family unit.
Ross Perot : Next thing.
Ross Perot : You need small schools, not big schools.
Ross Perot : In a little school everybody is somebody; individualism is very important.
Ross Perot : These big factories?
Ross Perot : Everybody told me they were cost-effective.
Ross Perot : I did a study on it; they're cost- ineffective.
Ross Perot : 5000 students -- why is a high school that big?
Ross Perot : One reason.
Ross Perot : Sooner or later you get 11 more boys that can run like the devil that weigh 250 pounds and they might win district.
Ross Perot : Now, that has nothing to do with learning.
Ross Perot : Secondly, across Texas, typically half of the school day was non-academic pursuits -- in one place it was 35%.
Ross Perot : In Texas you could have unlimited absences to go to livestock shows.
Ross Perot : Found a boy -- excuse me, but this gives the flavor -- a boy in Houston kept a chicken in the bathtub in downtown Houston and missed 65 days going to livestock shows.
Ross Perot : Finally had to come back to school, the chicken lost its feathers.
Ross Perot : That's the only way we got him back.
Ross Perot : (Laughter) Now, that's your tax money being wasted.
Ross Perot : Now, neighborhood schools.
Ross Perot : It is terrible to bus tiny little children across town.
Ross Perot : And it is particularly terrible to take poor tiny little children and wait until the first grade and bus them across town to Mars, where the children know their numbers, know their letters, have had every advantage.
Ross Perot : At the end of the first day, that little child wants out.
Ross Perot : I'll close on this.
Ross Perot : You've got to have world class teachers, world class books.
Ross Perot : If you ever got close to how textbooks were selected, you wouldn't want to go back the second day.
Ross Perot : I don't have time to tell you the stories.
Carole Simpson : No, you don't.
Ross Perot : Finally, if we don't fix this, you're right.
Ross Perot : We can't have the industries of tomorrow unless we have the best educated workforce.
Ross Perot : And here you've got, for the disadvantaged children, you've got to have early childhood development.
Ross Perot : Cheapest money you'll ever spend.
Ross Perot : First contact should be with the money when she's pregnant.
Ross Perot : That little child needs to be loved and hugged and nurtured and made to feel special, like your children were.
Ross Perot : They learn to think well or poorly of themselves in the first 18 months.
Carole Simpson : Thank you.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Thank you, Mr. Perot.
Ross Perot : And in the first few years they either learn how to learn or don't learn how to learn.
Ross Perot : And if they don't, they wind up in prison.
Carole Simpson : Thank you, Mr. Perot.
Ross Perot : And it costs more to keep them in prison than it does to send them to Harvard.
Ross Perot : I rest my case.
Carole Simpson : Thank you.
Carole Simpson : President Bush, you wanted to answer.
George Bush : I just had a word of clarification because of something Governor Clinton said.
George Bush : My school choice program, GI Bill for Kids, does not take public money and give it to private schools.
George Bush : It does what the GI Bill itself did when I came out of World War II.
George Bush : It takes public money and gives it to families or individuals to choose the school they want.
George Bush : And where it's been done, those schools, like in Rochester, those schools that weren't chosen find that they then compete and do better.
George Bush : So I think it's worth a shot.
George Bush : We've got a pilot program.
George Bush : It ought to be tried.
George Bush : School choice -- public, private or religious.
George Bush : Not to the schools but to -- you know, 46% of the teachers in Chicago, public school teachers, send their kids to private school.
George Bush : Now, I think we ought to try to help families and see if it will do what I think -- make all schools better.
Bill Clinton : I just want to mention if I could --
Carole Simpson : Very briefly.
Bill Clinton : Very briefly.
Bill Clinton : Including the parents in the preschool education of their kids, even if they're poor and uneducated, can make a huge difference.
Bill Clinton : We have a big program in my state that teaches mothers or fathers to teach their kids to get ready for school.
Bill Clinton : It's the most successful thing we've ever done.
Bill Clinton : Just a fact clarification real quickly.
Bill Clinton : We do not spend a higher percentage of our income on public education than every other country.
Bill Clinton : There are 9 countries that spend more than we do on public education.
Bill Clinton : We spend more on education 'cause we spend so much more on colleges.
Bill Clinton : But if you look at public education alone and you take into account the fact that we have more racial diversity and more poverty, it makes a big difference.
Bill Clinton : There are great public schools where there's public school choice, accountability and brilliant principals.
Bill Clinton : I'll just mention one -- the Beasley Academic Center in Chicago.
Bill Clinton : I commend it to anybody.
Bill Clinton : It's as good as any private school in the country.
Carole Simpson : We have very little time left and it occurs to me that we have talked all this time and there has not been one question about some of the racial tensions and ethnic tensions in America.
Carole Simpson : Is there anyone in this audience that would like to pose a question to the candidates on this?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : What I'd like to know, and this is to any of the three of you, is aside from the recent accomplishment of your party, aside from those accomplishments in racial representation, and without citing any of your current appointments or successful elections, when do you estimate your party will both nominate and elect an Afro-American and female ticket to the presidency of the U.S.?
Carole Simpson : Governor Clinton, why don't you answer that first?
Bill Clinton : Well, I don't have any idea but I hope it will happen some time in my lifetime.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : I do, too.
Bill Clinton : I believe that this country is electing more and more African Americans and Latinos and Asian Americans who are representing districts that are themselves not necessarily of a majority of their race.
Bill Clinton : The American people are beginning to vote across racial lines, and I hope it will happen more and more.
Bill Clinton : More and more women are being elected.
Bill Clinton : Look at all these women Senate candidates we have here.
Bill Clinton : And you know, according to my mother and my wife and my daughter, this world would be a lot better place if women were running it most of the time.
Bill Clinton : I do think there are special experiences and judgments and backgrounds and understandings that women bring to this process, by the way.
Bill Clinton : This lady said here, how have you been affected by the economy.
Bill Clinton : I mean, women know what's it like to be paid an unequal amount for equal work.
Bill Clinton : They know what it's like not to have flexible working hours.
Bill Clinton : They know what it's like not to have family leave or childcare.
Bill Clinton : So I think it would be a good thing for America if it happened.
Bill Clinton : And I think it will happen in my lifetime.
Carole Simpson : Okay.
Carole Simpson : I'm sorry.
Carole Simpson : We have just a little bit of time left.
Carole Simpson : Let's try to get responses from each of them.
Carole Simpson : President Bush or Mr. Perot?
George Bush : I think if Barbara Bush were running this year she'd be elected.
George Bush : But it's too late.
George Bush : (Laughter) You don't want us to mention appointees, but when you see the quality of people in our administration, see how Colin Powell performed -- I say administration --
AUDIENCE MEMBER : (Inaudible).
George Bush : You weren't impressed with the fact that he --
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Excuse me.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : I'm extremely impressed with that.
George Bush : Yeah, but wouldn't that suggest to the American people, then, here's a quality person, if he decided that he could automatically get the nomination of either party?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Sure -- I just wanted to know -- yes.
George Bush : Huh?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : I'm totally impressed with that.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : I just wanted to know is, when's your-
George Bush : Oh, I see.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : When?
George Bush : You mean, time?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Yeah.
George Bush : I don't know -- starting after 4 years.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : (Laughs)
George Bush : No, I think you'll see --
Carole Simpson : Mr. Perot.
George Bush : I think you'll see more minority candidates and women candidates coming forward.
Carole Simpson : We have -- thank you.
George Bush : This is supposed to be the year of the women in the Senate.
George Bush : Let's see how they do.
George Bush : I hope a lot of --
Carole Simpson : Mr. Perot -- I don't want to cut you off any more but we only have a minute left.
Ross Perot : I have a fearless forecast.
Ross Perot : A message just won't do it.
Ross Perot : Colin Powell will be on somebody's ticket 4 years from now -- right?
Ross Perot : Right?
Ross Perot : He wanted that said -- 4 years.
Carole Simpson : How about a woman?
Ross Perot : Now, if won't be, General Waller would be -- you say, why do you keep picking military people.
Ross Perot : These are people that I just happen to know and have a high regard for.
Ross Perot : I'm sure there are hundreds of others.
George Bush : How about Dr. Lou Sullivan?
Ross Perot : Absolutely.
George Bush : Yeah, a good man.
Carole Simpson : What about a woman?
Ross Perot : Oh, oh.
George Bush : (Inaudible) totally agree.
George Bush : My candidate's back there.
Carole Simpson : (Laughs)
Ross Perot : Okay.
Ross Perot : I can think of many.
Carole Simpson : Many?
Ross Perot : Absolutely.
Carole Simpson : When?
Ross Perot : All right.
Ross Perot : How about Sandra Day O'Connor as an example?
Carole Simpson : Hm-hm.
Ross Perot : Dr. Bernadine Healy --
Carole Simpson : Good.
Ross Perot : National Institutes of Health.
Ross Perot : I'll yield the floor.
George Bush : All good Republicans.
Ross Perot : Name some more.
Ross Perot : (Laughter)
Carole Simpson : Thank you.
Carole Simpson : I want to apologize to our audience because there were 209 people here and there were 209 questions.
Carole Simpson : We only got to a fraction of them and I'm sorry to those of you that didn't get to ask your questions but we must move to the conclusion of the program.
Carole Simpson : It is time now for the 2 minute closing statements and by prior agreement President Bush will go first.
George Bush : May I ask for an exception because I think we owe Carole Simpson -- anybody who can stand in between these three characters here and get the job done -- we owe her a round of applause.
George Bush : (Applause) But don't take it out of my time!
George Bush : (Applause)
Carole Simpson : That's right.
George Bush : I feel strongly about it because I don't want it to come out of my time.
Carole Simpson : Give this man more time.
Carole Simpson : (Laughs)
George Bush : No, but let me just stay to the American people in 2 and a half weeks we're going to choose who should sit in this Oval Office, who to lead the economic recovery, who to be the leader of the free world, who to get the deficit down.
George Bush : three ways to do that.
George Bush : One is to raise taxes.
George Bush : One is to reduce spending -- controlling that mandatory spending.
George Bush : Another one is to invest and save and to stimulate growth.
George Bush : I do not want to raise taxes.
George Bush : I differ with the 2 here on that.
George Bush : I'm just not going to do that.
George Bush : I do believe that we need to control mandatory spending.
George Bush : I think we need to invest and save more.
George Bush : I believe that we need to educate better and retrain better.
George Bush : I believe that we need to export more so I'll keep working for export agreements where we can sell more abroad and I believe that we must strengthen the family.
George Bush : We've got to strengthen the family.
George Bush : Now, let me pose this question to America.
George Bush : If in the next 5 minutes a television announcer came on and said, there is a major international crisis -- there is a major threat to the world or in this country a major threat -- my question is, who, if you were appointed to name 1 of the 3 of us, who would you choose?
George Bush : Who has the perseverance, the character, the integrity, the maturity, to get the job done?
George Bush : I hope I'm that person.
George Bush : Thank you very, very much.
Carole Simpson : Thank you, Mr. President.
Carole Simpson : And now a closing statement from Mr. Perot.
Ross Perot : If the American people want to do it and not talk about it, then they ought to -- you know, I'm one person they ought to consider.
Ross Perot : If they just want to keep slow dancing and talk about it and not do it, I'm not your man.
Ross Perot : I am results oriented.
Ross Perot : I am action oriented.
Ross Perot : I've dealt my businesses.
Ross Perot : Getting things done in three months that my competitors took 18 months to do.
Ross Perot : Everybody says you can't do that with Congress.
Ross Perot : Sure, you can do that with Congress.
Ross Perot : Congress -- they're all good people.
Ross Perot : They're all patriots but you've got to link arms and work with them.
Ross Perot : Sure, you'll have arguments.
Ross Perot : Sure, you'll have fights.
Ross Perot : We have them all day every day.
Ross Perot : But we get the job done.
Ross Perot : Now, I have to come back in my clothes to one thing because I am passionate about education.
Ross Perot : I was talking about early childhood education for disadvantaged little children.
Ross Perot : And let me tell you one specific pilot program where children who don't have a chance go to this program when they're 3.
Ross Perot : Now we're going back to when the mother's pregnant and they'll start right after they're born.
Ross Perot : Starting when they're 3 and going to this school until they're 9 and then going into the public school in the 4th grade.
Ross Perot : Ninety percent are on the honor role.
Ross Perot : Now that will change America.
Ross Perot : Those children will all go to college.
Ross Perot : They will live the American dream.
Ross Perot : And I beg the American people, any time they think about reforming education to take this piece of society that doesn't have a chance and take these little pieces of clay that can be shaped and molded and give them the same love and nurture and affection and support you give your children and teach them that they're unique and that they're precious and that there's only one person in the world like them and you will see this nation bloom.
Ross Perot : And we will have so many people who are qualified for the top job that it will be terrific.
Ross Perot : Now, finally, if you can't pay the bills you're dead in the water.
Ross Perot : And we have got to put our nation back to work.
Ross Perot : Now, if you don't want to really do that I'm not your man.
Ross Perot : I'd go crazy sitting up there slow dancing that one.
Ross Perot : In other words, unless we're going to do it, then pick somebody who likes to talk about it.
Ross Perot : Now, just remember when you think about me -- I didn't create this mess.
Ross Perot : I've been paying taxes just like you and Lord knows, I've paid my share -- over a billion in taxes.
Ross Perot : And for a guy that started out with everything he owned in the trunk of his car --
Carole Simpson : Mr. Perot, I'm sorry --
Ross Perot : -- that ain't bad.
Carole Simpson : -- once again.
Ross Perot : But it's in your hands.
Ross Perot : I wish you well.
Ross Perot : I'll see you tomorrow night -- (Laughter) on NBC -- 10:30 to 11:00 Eastern Time.
Ross Perot : (Laughter)
Carole Simpson : And finally, last but not least -- Governor Clinton.
Bill Clinton : Thank you, Carole, and thank you, ladies and gentlemen.
Bill Clinton : Since I suggested this format I hope it's been good for all of you.
Bill Clinton : I really tried to be faithful to your request that we answer the questions specifically and pointedly.
Bill Clinton : I thought I owed that to you and I respect you for being here and for the impact you've had on making this a more positive experience.
Bill Clinton : These problems are not easy.
Bill Clinton : They're not going to be solved overnight.
Bill Clinton : But I want you to think about just 2 or 3 things.
Bill Clinton : First of all, the people of my state have let me be their governor for 12 years because I made commitments to 2 things -- more jobs and better schools.
Bill Clinton : Our schools are now better.
Bill Clinton : Our children get off to a better start from pre-school programs and smaller classes in the early grades, and we have one of the most aggressive adult education programs in the country.
Bill Clinton : We talked about that.
Bill Clinton : This year my state ranks first in the country in job growth, 4th in manufacturing in job growth, 4th in income growth, 4th in the decline of poverty.
Bill Clinton : I'm proud of that.
Bill Clinton : It happened because I could work with people -- Republicans and Democrats.
Bill Clinton : That's why we've had 24 retired generals and admirals, hundreds of business people, many of them Republican, support this campaign.
Bill Clinton : You have to decide whether you want to change or not.
Bill Clinton : We do not need 4 more years of an economic theory that doesn't work.
Bill Clinton : We've had 12 years of trickle down economics.
Bill Clinton : It's time to put the American people first, to invest and grow this economy.
Bill Clinton : I'm the only person here who's ever balanced a government budget and I've presented 12 of them and cut spending repeatedly.
Bill Clinton : But you cannot just get there by balancing the budget.
Bill Clinton : We've got to grow the economy by putting people first -- real people like you.
Bill Clinton : I got into this race because I did not want my child to grow up to be part of the first generation of Americans to do worse than her parents.
Bill Clinton : We're better than that.
Bill Clinton : We can do better than that.
Bill Clinton : I want to make America as great as it can be and I ask for your help in doing it.
Bill Clinton : Thank you very much.
Carole Simpson : Thank you, Governor Clinton.
Carole Simpson : Ladies and gentlemen, this concludes the debate, sponsored by the Bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates.
Carole Simpson : I'd like to thank our audience of 209 uncommitted voters who may leave this evening maybe being committed and hopefully they'll go to the polls like everyone else on November 3rd and vote.
Carole Simpson : We invite you to join us on the 3rd and final presidential debate Monday, Oct 19, from the campus of Michigan State University in East Lansing, Mich.
Carole Simpson : I'm Carole Simpson.
Carole Simpson : Good night.
