Information : PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA AND FORMER GOV.
Information : MITT ROMNEY,
Information : R-MASS., PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE, PARTICIPATE IN A
Information : CANDIDATES DEBATE, UNIVERSITY OF DENVER, COLORADO
Information : OCTOBER 3, 2012
Information : SPEAKERS: FORMER GOV.
Information : MITT ROMNEY, R-MASS.
Information : PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA
Information : JIM LEHRER, MODERATOR
Jim Lehrer : Good evening from the Magness Arena at the University of Denver in Denver, Colorado.
Jim Lehrer : "I'm Jim Lehrer of the ""PBS NewsHour,"" and I welcome you to the first of the 2012 presidential debates between President Barack Obama, the Democratic nominee, and former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney, the Republican nominee."
Jim Lehrer : This debate and the next three -- two presidential, one vice presidential -- are sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates.
Jim Lehrer : Tonight's 90 minutes will be about domestic issues and will follow a format designed by the commission.
Jim Lehrer : There will be six roughly 15-minute segments with two-minute answers for the first question, then open discussion for the remainder of each segment.
Jim Lehrer : Thousands of people offered suggestions on segment subjects or questions via the Internet and other means, but I made the final selections.
Jim Lehrer : And for the record, they were not submitted for approval to the commission or the candidates.
Jim Lehrer : The segments as I announced in advance will be three on the economy and one each on health care, the role of government and governing, with an emphasis throughout on differences, specifics and choices.
Jim Lehrer : Both candidates will also have two-minute closing statements.
Jim Lehrer : The audience here in the hall has promised to remain silent -- no cheers, applause, boos, hisses, among other noisy distracting things, so we may all concentrate on what the candidates have to say.
Jim Lehrer : There is a noise exception right now, though, as we welcome President Obama and Governor Romney.
Jim Lehrer : (APPLAUSE)
Jim Lehrer : Gentlemen, welcome to you both.
Jim Lehrer : Let's start the economy, segment one, and let's begin with jobs.
Jim Lehrer : What are the major differences between the two of you about how you would go about creating new jobs?
Jim Lehrer : You have two minutes.
Jim Lehrer : Each of you have two minutes to start.
Jim Lehrer : A coin toss has determined, Mr. President, you go first.
Barack Obama : Well, thank you very much, Jim, for this opportunity.
Barack Obama : I want to thank Governor Romney and the University of Denver for your hospitality.
Barack Obama : There are a lot of points I want to make tonight, but the most important one is that 20 years ago I became the luckiest man on Earth because Michelle Obama agreed to marry me.
Barack Obama : And so I just want to wish, Sweetie, you happy anniversary and let you know that a year from now we will not be celebrating it in front of 40 million people.
Barack Obama : (LAUGHTER)
Barack Obama : You know, four years ago we went through the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression.
Barack Obama : Millions of jobs were lost, the auto industry was on the brink of collapse.
Barack Obama : The financial system had frozen up.
Barack Obama : And because of the resilience and the determination of the American people, we've begun to fight our way back.
Barack Obama : Over the last 30 months, we've seen 5 million jobs in the private sector created.
Barack Obama : The auto industry has come roaring back.
Barack Obama : And housing has begun to rise.
Barack Obama : But we all know that we've still got a lot of work to do.
Barack Obama : And so the question here tonight is not where we've been, but where we're going.
Barack Obama : Governor Romney has a perspective that says if we cut taxes, skewed towards the wealthy, and roll back regulations, that we'll be better off.
Barack Obama : I've got a different view.
Barack Obama : I think we've got to invest in education and training.
Barack Obama : I think it's important for us to develop new sources of energy here in America, that we change our tax code to make sure that we're helping small businesses and companies that are investing here in the United States, that we take some of the money that we're saving as we wind down two wars to rebuild America and that we reduce our deficit in a balanced way that allows us to make these critical investments.
Barack Obama : Now, it ultimately is going to be up to the voters -- to you -- which path we should take.
Barack Obama : Are we going to double on top-down economic policies that helped to get us into this mess or do we embrace a new economic patriotism that says America does best when the middle class does best?
Barack Obama : And I'm looking forward to having that debate.
Jim Lehrer : Governor Romney, two minutes.
Mitt Romney : Thank you, Jim.
Mitt Romney : It's an honor to be here with you, and I appreciate the chance to be with the president.
Mitt Romney : I'm pleased to be at the University of Denver, appreciate their welcome, and also the Presidential Commission on these debates.
Mitt Romney : And congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your anniversary.
Mitt Romney : I'm sure this was the most romantic place you could imagine, here -- here with me.
Mitt Romney : So I...
Mitt Romney : (LAUGHTER)
Mitt Romney : Congratulations.
Mitt Romney : This is obviously a very tender topic.
Mitt Romney : I've had the occasion over the last couple of years of meeting people across the country.
Mitt Romney : "I was in Dayton, Ohio, and a woman grabbed my arm and she said, ""I've been out of work since May."
Mitt Romney : "Can you help me?"""
Mitt Romney : "Ann yesterday was at a rally in Denver and a woman came up to her with a baby in her arms and said, ""Ann, my husband has had four jobs in three years, part-time jobs."
Mitt Romney : He's lost his most recent job and we've now just lost our home.
Mitt Romney : "Can you help us?"""
Mitt Romney : And the answer is, yes, we can help, but it's going to take a different path.
Mitt Romney : Not the one we've been on, not the one the president describes as a top-down, cut taxes for the rich.
Mitt Romney : That's not what I'm going to do.
Mitt Romney : My plan has five basic parts.
Mitt Romney : One, get us energy independent, North American energy independent.
Mitt Romney : That creates about 4 million jobs.
Mitt Romney : Number two, open up more trade, particularly in Latin America.
Mitt Romney : Crack down on China, if and when they cheat.
Mitt Romney : Number three, make sure our people have the skills they need to succeed and the best schools in the world.
Mitt Romney : We're far away from that now.
Mitt Romney : Number four, get to us a balanced budget.
Mitt Romney : Number five, champion small business.
Mitt Romney : It's small business that creates the jobs in America, and over the last four years, small business people have decided that America may not be the place to open a new business because new business startups are down to a 30-year low.
Mitt Romney : Now, I'm concerned that the path that we're on has just been unsuccessful.
Mitt Romney : The president has a view very similar to the view he had when he ran four years, that a bigger government, spending more, taxing more, regulating more -- if you will, trickle-down government -- would work.
Mitt Romney : That's not the right answer for America.
Mitt Romney : I'll restore the vitality that gets America working again.
Mitt Romney : Thank you.
Jim Lehrer : Mr. President, please respond directly to what the governor just said about trickle-down -- his trick-down approach, as he said yours is.
Barack Obama : Well, let me talk specifically about what I think we need to do.
Barack Obama : First, we've got to improve our education system and we've made enormous progress drawing on ideas both from Democrats and Republicans that are already starting to show gains in some of the toughest to deal with schools.
Barack Obama : We've got a program called Race to the Top that has prompted reforms in 46 states around the country, raising standards, improving how we train teachers.
Barack Obama : So now I want to hire another 100,000 new math and science teachers, and create 2 million more slots in our community colleges so that people can get trained for the jobs that are out there right now.
Barack Obama : And I want to make sure that we keep tuition low for our young people.
Barack Obama : When it comes to our tax code, Governor Romney and I both agree that our corporate tax rate is too high, so I want to lower it, particularly for manufacturing, taking it down to 25 percent.
Barack Obama : But I also want to close those loopholes that are giving incentives for companies that are shipping jobs overseas.
Barack Obama : I want to provide tax breaks for companies that are investing here in the United States.
Barack Obama : On energy, Governor Romney and I, we both agree that we've got to boost American energy production, and oil and natural gas production are higher than they've been in years.
Barack Obama : But I also believe that we've got to look at the energy sources of the future, like wind and solar and biofuels, and make those investments.
Barack Obama : So all of this is possible.
Barack Obama : Now, in order for us to do it, we do have to close our deficit, and one of the things I'm sure we'll be discussing tonight is, how do we deal with our tax code?
Barack Obama : And how do we make sure that we are reducing spending in a responsible way, but also, how do we have enough revenue to make those investments?
Barack Obama : And this is where there's a difference, because Governor Romney's central economic plan calls for a $5 trillion tax cut -- on top of the extension of the Bush tax cuts -- that's another trillion dollars -- and $2 trillion in additional military spending that the military hasn't asked for.
Barack Obama : That's $8 trillion.
Barack Obama : How we pay for that, reduce the deficit, and make the investments that we need to make, without dumping those costs onto middle-class Americans, I think is one of the central questions of this campaign.
Jim Lehrer : Both of you have spoken about a lot of different things, and we're going to try to get through them in as specific a way as we possibly can.
Jim Lehrer : But, first, Governor Romney, do you have a question that you'd like to ask the president directly about something he just said?
Mitt Romney : Well, sure.
Mitt Romney : I'd like to clear up the record and go through it piece by piece.
Mitt Romney : First of all, I don't have a $5 trillion tax cut.
Mitt Romney : I don't have a tax cut of a scale that you're talking about.
Mitt Romney : My view is that we ought to provide tax relief to people in the middle class.
Mitt Romney : But I'm not going to reduce the share of taxes paid by high-income people.
Mitt Romney : High-income people are doing just fine in this economy.
Mitt Romney : They'll do fine whether you're president or I am.
Mitt Romney : The people who are having the hard time right now are middle- income Americans.
Mitt Romney : Under the president's policies, middle-income Americans have been buried.
Mitt Romney : They're just being crushed.
Mitt Romney : Middle- income Americans have seen their income come down by $4,300.
Mitt Romney : This is a -- this is a tax in and of itself.
Mitt Romney : I'll call it the economy tax.
Mitt Romney : It's been crushing.
Mitt Romney : At the same time, gasoline prices have doubled under the president.
Mitt Romney : Electric rates are up.
Mitt Romney : Food prices are up.
Mitt Romney : Health care costs have gone up by $2,500 a family.
Mitt Romney : Middle-income families are being crushed.
Mitt Romney : And so the question is how to get them going again.
Mitt Romney : And I've described it.
Mitt Romney : It's energy and trade, the right kind of training programs, balancing our budget and helping small business.
Mitt Romney : Those are the -- the cornerstones of my plan.
Mitt Romney : But the president mentioned a couple of other ideas I'll just note.
Mitt Romney : First, education.
Mitt Romney : I agree: Education is key, particularly the future of our economy.
Mitt Romney : But our training programs right now, we've got 47 of them, housed in the federal government, reporting to eight different agencies.
Mitt Romney : Overhead is overwhelming.
Mitt Romney : We've got to get those dollars back to the states and go to the workers so they can create their own pathways to get in the training they need for jobs that will really help them.
Mitt Romney : The second area, taxation, we agree, we ought to bring the tax rates down.
Mitt Romney : And I do, both for corporations and for individuals.
Mitt Romney : But in order for us not to lose revenue, have the government run out of money, I also lower deductions and credits and exemptions, so that we keep taking in the same money when you also account for growth.
Mitt Romney : The third area, energy.
Mitt Romney : Energy is critical, and the president pointed out correctly that production of oil and gas in the U.S. is up.
Mitt Romney : But not due to his policies.
Mitt Romney : In spite of his policies.
Mitt Romney : Mr. President, all of the increase in natural gas and oil has happened on private land, not on government land.
Mitt Romney : On government land, your administration has cut the number of permits and licenses in half.
Mitt Romney : If I'm president, I'll double them, and also get the -- the oil from offshore and Alaska.
Mitt Romney : And I'll bring that pipeline in from Canada.
Mitt Romney : And, by the way, I like coal.
Mitt Romney : I'm going to make sure we can continue to burn clean coal.
Mitt Romney : People in the coal industry feel like it's getting crushed by your policies.
Mitt Romney : I want to get America and North America energy independent so we can create those jobs.
Mitt Romney : And finally, with regards to that tax cut, look, I'm not looking to cut massive taxes and to reduce the -- the revenues going to the government.
Mitt Romney : My -- my number-one principal is, there will be no tax cut that adds to the deficit.
Mitt Romney : I want to underline that: no tax cut that adds to the deficit.
Mitt Romney : But I do want to reduce the burden being paid by middle-income Americans.
Mitt Romney : And I -- and to do that, that also means I cannot reduce the burden paid by high-income Americans.
Mitt Romney : So any -- any language to the contrary is simply not accurate.
Jim Lehrer : Mr. President?
Barack Obama : Well, I think -- let's talk about taxes, because I think it's instructive.
Barack Obama : Now, four years ago, when I stood on this stage, I said that I would cut taxes for middle-class families.
Barack Obama : And that's exactly what I did.
Barack Obama : We cut taxes for middle-class families by about $3,600.
Barack Obama : And the reason is, because I believe that we do best when the middle class is doing well.
Barack Obama : And by giving them those tax cuts, they had a little more money in their pocket, and so maybe they can buy a new car.
Barack Obama : They are certainly in a better position to weather the extraordinary recession that we went through.
Barack Obama : They can buy a computer for their kid who's going off to college, which means they're spending more money, businesses have more customers, businesses make more profits, and then hire more workers.
Barack Obama : Now, Governor Romney's proposal that he has been promoting for 18 months calls for a $5 trillion tax cut, on top of $2 trillion of additional spending for our military.
Barack Obama : And he is saying that he is going to pay for it by closing loopholes and deductions.
Barack Obama : The problem is that he's been asked over 100 times how you would close those deductions and loopholes, and he hasn't been able to identify them.
Barack Obama : But I'm going to make an important point here, Jim.
Jim Lehrer : All right.
Barack Obama : When you add up all the loopholes and deductions that upper-income individuals can -- are currently taking advantage of, you take those all away, you don't come close to paying for $5 trillion in tax cuts and $2 trillion in additional military spending.
Barack Obama : And that's why independent studies looking at this said the only way to meet Governor Romney's pledge of not reducing the deficit or -- or -- or not adding to the deficit is by burdening middle-class families.
Barack Obama : The average middle-class family with children would pay about $2,000 more.
Barack Obama : Now, that's not my analysis.
Barack Obama : That's the analysis of economists who have looked at this.
Barack Obama : And -- and that kind of top -- top-down economics, where folks at the top are doing well, so the average person making $3 million is getting a $250,000 tax break, while middle-class families are burdened further, that's not what I believe is a recipe for economic growth.
Jim Lehrer : All right.
Jim Lehrer : What is the difference?
Jim Lehrer : Let's just stay on taxes.
Jim Lehrer : (CROSSTALK)
Jim Lehrer : Just -- let's just stay on taxes for (inaudible).
Jim Lehrer : (CROSSTALK)
Jim Lehrer : What is the difference...
Mitt Romney : Well, but -- but virtually -- virtually everything he just said about my tax plan is inaccurate.
Jim Lehrer : All right.
Mitt Romney : So if the tax plan he described were a tax plan I was asked to support, I'd say absolutely not.
Mitt Romney : I'm not looking for a $5 trillion tax cut.
Mitt Romney : What I've said is I won't put in place a tax cut that adds to the deficit.
Mitt Romney : That's part one.
Mitt Romney : So there's no economist that can say Mitt Romney's tax plan adds $5 trillion if I say I will not add to the deficit with my tax plan.
Mitt Romney : Number two, I will not reduce the share paid by high-income individuals.
Mitt Romney : I know that you and your running mate keep saying that and I know it's a popular thing to say with a lot of people, but it's just not the case.
Mitt Romney : Look, I've got five boys.
Mitt Romney : I'm used to people saying something that's not always true, but just keep on repeating it and ultimately hoping I'll believe it.
Mitt Romney : But that -- that is not the case.
Mitt Romney : All right?
Mitt Romney : I will not reduce the taxes paid by high-income Americans.
Mitt Romney : And number three, I will not under any circumstances raise taxes on middle-income families.
Mitt Romney : I will lower taxes on middle-income families.
Mitt Romney : Now, you cite a study.
Mitt Romney : There are six other studies that looked at the study you describe and say it's completely wrong.
Mitt Romney : I saw a study that came out today that said you're going to raise taxes by $3,000 to $4,000 on middle-income families.
Mitt Romney : There are all these studies out there.
Mitt Romney : But let's get at the bottom line.
Mitt Romney : That is, I want to bring down rates.
Mitt Romney : I want to bring the rates down, at the same time lower deductions and exemptions and credits and so forth, so we keep getting the revenue we need.
Mitt Romney : And you'd think, well, then why lower the rates?
Mitt Romney : And the reason is because small business pays that individual rate; 54 percent of America's workers work in businesses that are taxed not at the corporate tax rate, but at the individual tax rate.
Mitt Romney : And if we lower that rate, they will be able to hire more people.
Mitt Romney : For me, this is about jobs.
Mitt Romney : This is about getting jobs for the American people.
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Jim Lehrer : That's where we started.
Jim Lehrer : Yeah.
Jim Lehrer : Do you challenge what the governor just said about his own plan?
Barack Obama : Well, for 18 months he's been running on this tax plan.
Barack Obama : "And now, five weeks before the election, he's saying that his big, bold idea is, ""Never mind."""
Barack Obama : And the fact is that if you are lowering the rates the way you described, Governor, then it is not possible to come up with enough deductions and loopholes that only affect high-income individuals to avoid either raising the deficit or burdening the middle class.
Barack Obama : It's -- it's math.
Barack Obama : It's arithmetic.
Barack Obama : Now, Governor Romney and I do share a deep interest in encouraging small-business growth.
Barack Obama : So at the same time that my tax plan has already lowered taxes for 98 percent of families, I also lowered taxes for small businesses 18 times.
Barack Obama : And what I want to do is continue the tax rates -- the tax cuts that we put into place for small businesses and families.
Barack Obama : But I have said that for incomes over $250,000 a year, that we should go back to the rates that we had when Bill Clinton was president, when we created 23 million new jobs, went from deficit to surplus, and created a whole lot of millionaires to boot.
Barack Obama : And the reason this is important is because by doing that, we cannot only reduce the deficit, we cannot only encourage job growth through small businesses, but we're also able to make the investments that are necessary in education or in energy.
Barack Obama : And we do have a difference, though, when it comes to definitions of small business.
Barack Obama : Under -- under my plan, 97 percent of small businesses would not see their income taxes go up.
Barack Obama : Governor Romney says, well, those top 3 percent, they're the job creators, they'd be burdened.
Barack Obama : But under Governor Romney's definition, there are a whole bunch of millionaires and billionaires who are small businesses.
Barack Obama : Donald Trump is a small business.
Barack Obama : Now, I know Donald Trump doesn't like to think of himself as small anything, but -- but that's how you define small businesses if you're getting business income.
Barack Obama : And that kind of approach, I believe, will not grow our economy, because the only way to pay for it without either burdening the middle class or blowing up our deficit is to make drastic cuts in things like education, making sure that we are continuing to invest in basic science and research, all the things that are helping America grow.
Barack Obama : And I think that would be a mistake.
Jim Lehrer : All right.
Mitt Romney : Jim, let me just come back on that -- on that point, which is these...
Jim Lehrer : Just for the -- just for record...
Jim Lehrer : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : ... the small businesses we're talking about...
Jim Lehrer : Excuse me.
Jim Lehrer : Excuse me.
Jim Lehrer : Just so everybody understands, we're way over our first 15 minutes.
Mitt Romney : It's fun, isn't it?
Jim Lehrer : It's OK, it's great.
Jim Lehrer : No problem.
Jim Lehrer : Well, you all don't have -- you don't have a problem, I don't have a problem, because we're still on the economy.
Jim Lehrer : We're going to come back to taxes.
Jim Lehrer : I want move on to the deficit and a lot of other things, too.
Jim Lehrer : OK, but go ahead, sir.
Mitt Romney : You bet.
Mitt Romney : Well, President, you're -- Mr. President, you're absolutely right, which is that, with regards to 97 percent of the businesses are not -- not taxed at the 35 percent tax rate, they're taxed at a lower rate.
Mitt Romney : But those businesses that are in the last 3 percent of businesses happen to employ half -- half of all the people who work in small business.
Mitt Romney : Those are the businesses that employ one-quarter of all the workers in America.
Mitt Romney : And your plan is to take their tax rate from 35 percent to 40 percent.
Mitt Romney : Now, and -- and I've talked to a guy who has a very small business.
Mitt Romney : He's in the electronics business in -- in St. Louis.
Mitt Romney : He has four employees.
Mitt Romney : He said he and his son calculated how much they pay in taxes, federal income tax, federal payroll tax, state income tax, state sales tax, state property tax, gasoline tax.
Mitt Romney : It added up to well over 50 percent of what they earned.
Mitt Romney : And your plan is to take the tax rate on successful small businesses from 35 percent to 40 percent.
Mitt Romney : The National Federation of Independent Businesses has said that will cost 700,000 jobs.
Mitt Romney : I don't want to cost jobs.
Mitt Romney : My priority is jobs.
Mitt Romney : And so what I do is I bring down the tax rates, lower deductions and exemptions, the same idea behind Bowles-Simpson, by the way, get the rates down, lower deductions and exemptions, to create more jobs, because there's nothing better for getting us to a balanced budget than having more people working, earning more money, paying more taxes.
Mitt Romney : That's by far the most effective and efficient way to get this budget balanced.
Barack Obama : Jim, I -- you may want to move onto another topic, but I -- I would just say this to the American people.
Barack Obama : If you believe that we can cut taxes by $5 trillion and add $2 trillion in additional spending that the military is not asking for, $7 trillion -- just to give you a sense, over 10 years, that's more than our entire defense budget -- and you think that by closing loopholes and deductions for the well-to-do, somehow you will not end up picking up the tab, then Governor Romney's plan may work for you.
Barack Obama : But I think math, common sense, and our history shows us that's not a recipe for job growth.
Barack Obama : Look, we've tried this.
Barack Obama : We've tried both approaches.
Barack Obama : The approach that Governor Romney's talking about is the same sales pitch that was made in 2001 and 2003, and we ended up with the slowest job growth in 50 years, we ended up moving from surplus to deficits, and it all culminated in the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression.
Barack Obama : Bill Clinton tried the approach that I'm talking about.
Barack Obama : We created 23 million new jobs.
Barack Obama : We went from deficit to surplus.
Barack Obama : And businesses did very well.
Barack Obama : So, in some ways, we've got some data on which approach is more likely to create jobs and opportunity for Americans and I believe that the economy works best when middle-class families are getting tax breaks so that they've got some money in their pockets, and those of us who have done extraordinarily well because of this magnificent country that we live in, that we can afford to do a little bit more to make sure we're not blowing up the deficit.
Mitt Romney : Jim, the president began this segment, so I think I get the last word.
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Jim Lehrer : Well, you're going to get the first word in the next segment.
Mitt Romney : All right.
Mitt Romney : Well, but he gets the first word of that segment.
Mitt Romney : I get the last word (inaudible) I hope.
Mitt Romney : Let me just make this comment.
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : I think first of all, let me -- let me repeat -- let me repeat what I said.
Mitt Romney : I'm not in favor of a $5 trillion tax cut.
Mitt Romney : That's not my plan.
Mitt Romney : My plan is not to put in place any tax cut that will add to the deficit.
Mitt Romney : That's point one.
Mitt Romney : So you may keep referring to it as a $5 trillion tax cut, but that's not my plan.
Mitt Romney : Number two, let's look at history.
Mitt Romney : My plan is not like anything that's been tried before.
Mitt Romney : My plan is to bring down rates, but also bring down deductions and exemptions and credits at the same time so the revenue stays in, but that we bring down rates to get more people working.
Mitt Romney : My priority is putting people back to work in America.
Mitt Romney : They're suffering in this country.
Mitt Romney : And we talk about evidence.
Mitt Romney : Look at the evidence of the last four years.
Mitt Romney : It's absolutely extraordinary.
Mitt Romney : We've got 23 million people out of work or stopped looking for work in this country.
Mitt Romney : It's just -- it's -- we've got -- when the president took office, 32 million people on food stamps; 47 million on food stamps today; economic growth this year slower than last year, and last year slower than the year before.
Mitt Romney : Going forward with the status quo is not going to cut it for the American people who are struggling today.
Jim Lehrer : All right.
Jim Lehrer : Let's talk -- we're still on the economy.
Jim Lehrer : This is, theoretically now, a second segment still on the economy, and specifically on what to do about the federal deficit, the federal debt.
Jim Lehrer : And the question, you each have two minutes on this, and Governor Romney, you -- you go first because the president went first on segment one.
Jim Lehrer : And the question is this, what are the differences between the two of you as to how you would go about tackling the deficit problem in this country?
Mitt Romney : Good.
Mitt Romney : I'm glad you raised that, and it's a -- it's a critical issue.
Mitt Romney : I think it's not just an economic issue, I think it's a moral issue.
Mitt Romney : I think it's, frankly, not moral for my generation to keep spending massively more than we take in, knowing those burdens are going to be passed on to the next generation and they're going to be paying the interest and the principal all their lives.
Mitt Romney : And the amount of debt we're adding, at a trillion a year, is simply not moral.
Mitt Romney : So how do we deal with it?
Mitt Romney : Well, mathematically, there are three ways that you can cut a deficit.
Mitt Romney : One, of course, is to raise taxes.
Mitt Romney : Number two is to cut spending.
Mitt Romney : And number is to grow the economy, because if more people work in a growing economy, they're paying taxes, and you can get the job done that way.
Mitt Romney : The presidents would -- president would prefer raising taxes.
Mitt Romney : I understand.
Mitt Romney : The problem with raising taxes is that it slows down the rate of growth.
Mitt Romney : And you could never quite get the job done.
Mitt Romney : I want to lower spending and encourage economic growth at the same time.
Mitt Romney : What things would I cut from spending?
Mitt Romney : Well, first of all, I will eliminate all programs by this test, if they don't pass it: Is the program so critical it's worth borrowing money from China to pay for it?
Mitt Romney : And if not, I'll get rid of it.
Mitt Romney : Obamacare's on my list.
Mitt Romney : I apologize, Mr. President.
Mitt Romney : I use that term with all respect, by the way.
Barack Obama : I like it.
Mitt Romney : Good.
Mitt Romney : OK, good.
Mitt Romney : So I'll get rid of that.
Mitt Romney : I'm sorry, Jim, I'm going to stop the subsidy to PBS.
Mitt Romney : I'm going to stop other things.
Mitt Romney : I like PBS, I love Big Bird.
Mitt Romney : Actually like you, too.
Mitt Romney : But I'm not going to -- I'm not going to keep on spending money on things to borrow money from China to pay for.
Mitt Romney : That's number one.
Mitt Romney : Number two, I'll take programs that are currently good programs but I think could be run more efficiently at the state level and send them to the state.
Mitt Romney : Number three, I'll make government more efficient and to cut back the number of employees, combine some agencies and departments.
Mitt Romney : My cutbacks will be done through attrition, by the way.
Mitt Romney : This is the approach we have to take to get America to a balanced budget.
Mitt Romney : The president said he'd cut the deficit in half.
Mitt Romney : Unfortunately, he doubled it.
Mitt Romney : Trillion-dollar deficits for the last four years.
Mitt Romney : The president's put it in place as much public debt -- almost as much debt held by the public as al prior presidents combined.
Jim Lehrer : Mr. President, two minutes.
Barack Obama : When I walked into the Oval Office, I had more than a trillion-dollar deficit greeting me.
Barack Obama : And we know where it came from: two wars that were paid for on a credit card; two tax cuts that were not paid for; and a whole bunch of programs that were not paid for; and then a massive economic crisis.
Barack Obama : And despite that, what we've said is, yes, we had to take some initial emergency measures to make sure we didn't slip into a Great Depression, but what we've also said is, let's make sure that we are cutting out those things that are not helping us grow.
Barack Obama : So 77 government programs, everything from aircrafts that the Air Force had ordered but weren't working very well, 18 government -- 18 government programs for education that were well-intentioned, not weren't helping kids learn, we went after medical fraud in Medicare and Medicaid very aggressively, more aggressively than ever before, and have saved tens of billions of dollars, $50 billion of waste taken out of the system.
Barack Obama : And I worked with Democrats and Republicans to cut a trillion dollars out of our discretionary domestic budget.
Barack Obama : That's the largest cut in the discretionary domestic budget since Dwight Eisenhower.
Barack Obama : Now, we all know that we've got to do more.
Barack Obama : And so I've put forward a specific $4 trillion deficit reduction plan.
Barack Obama : It's on a website.
Barack Obama : You can look at all the numbers, what cuts we make and what revenue we raise.
Barack Obama : And the way we do it is $2.50 for every cut, we ask for $1 of additional revenue, paid for, as I indicated earlier, by asking those of us who have done very well in this country to contribute a little bit more to reduce the deficit.
Barack Obama : Governor Romney earlier mentioned the Bowles-Simpson commission.
Barack Obama : Well, that's how the commission -- bipartisan commission that talked about how we should move forward suggested we have to do it, in a balanced way with some revenue and some spending cuts.
Barack Obama : And this is a major difference that Governor Romney and I have.
Barack Obama : Let -- let me just finish their point, because you're looking for contrast.
Barack Obama : You know, when Governor Romney stood on a stage with other Republican candidates for the nomination and he was asked, would you take $10 of spending cuts for just $1 of revenue?
Barack Obama : And he said no.
Barack Obama : Now, if you take such an unbalanced approach, then that means you are going to be gutting our investments in schools and education.
Barack Obama : It means that Governor Romney...
Barack Obama : (CROSSTALK)
Barack Obama : ... talked about Medicaid and how we could send it back to the states, but effectively this means a 30 percent cut in the primary program we help for seniors who are in nursing homes, for kids who are with disabilities.
Jim Lehrer : Mr. President, I'm sorry.
Barack Obama : And -- and that is not a right strategy for us to move forward.
Jim Lehrer : Way over the two minutes.
Barack Obama : Sorry.
Jim Lehrer : Governor, what about Simpson-Bowles?
Jim Lehrer : Do you support Simpson-Bowles?
Mitt Romney : Simpson-Bowles, the president should have grabbed that.
Jim Lehrer : No, I mean, do you support Simpson-Bowles?
Mitt Romney : I have my own plan.
Mitt Romney : It's not the same as Simpson- Bowles.
Mitt Romney : But in my view, the president should have grabbed it.
Mitt Romney : If you wanted to make some adjustments to it, take it, go to Congress, fight for it.
Barack Obama : That's what we've done, made some adjustments to it, and we're putting it forward before Congress right now, a $4 trillion plan...
Mitt Romney : But you've been -- but you've been president four years...
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : You've been president four years.
Mitt Romney : You said you'd cut the deficit in half.
Mitt Romney : It's now four years later.
Mitt Romney : We still have trillion-dollar deficits.
Mitt Romney : The CBO says we'll have a trillion-dollar deficit each of the next four years.
Mitt Romney : If you're re-elected, we'll get to a trillion-dollar debt.
Mitt Romney : I mean, you have said before you'd cut the deficit in half.
Mitt Romney : And this -- I love this idea of $4 trillion in cuts.
Mitt Romney : You found $4 trillion of ways to reduce or to get closer to a balanced budget, except we still show trillion-dollar deficits every year.
Mitt Romney : That doesn't get the job done.
Mitt Romney : Let me come back and say, why is it that I don't want to raise taxes?
Mitt Romney : Why don't I want to raise taxes on people?
Mitt Romney : And actually, you said it back in 2010.
Mitt Romney : "You said, ""Look, I'm going to extend the tax policies that we have now; I'm not going to raise taxes on anyone, because when the economy is growing slow like this, when we're in recession, you shouldn't raise taxes on anyone."""
Mitt Romney : Well, the economy is still growing slow.
Mitt Romney : As a matter of fact, it's growing much more slowly now than when you made that statement.
Mitt Romney : And so if you believe the same thing, you just don't want to raise taxes on people.
Mitt Romney : And the reality is it's not just wealthy people -- you mentioned Donald Trump.
Mitt Romney : It's not just Donald Trump you're taxing.
Mitt Romney : It's all those businesses that employ one-quarter of the workers in America; these small businesses that are taxed as individuals.
Mitt Romney : You raise taxes and you kill jobs.
Mitt Romney : That's why the National Federation of Independent Businesses said your plan will kill 700,000 jobs.
Mitt Romney : I don't want to kill jobs in this environment.
Mitt Romney : I'll make one more point.
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Jim Lehrer : (inaudible) answer the taxes thing for a moment.
Mitt Romney : OK.
Jim Lehrer : Mr. President?
Barack Obama : Well, we've had this discussion before.
Jim Lehrer : About the idea that in order to reduce the deficit, there has to be revenue in addition to cuts.
Barack Obama : There has to be revenue in addition to cuts.
Barack Obama : Now, Governor Romney has ruled out revenue.
Barack Obama : He's ruled out revenue.
Barack Obama : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : Absolutely.
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : Look, the revenue I get is by more people working, getting higher pay, paying more taxes.
Mitt Romney : That's how we get growth and how we balance the budget.
Mitt Romney : But the idea of taxing people more, putting more people out of work, you'll never get there.
Mitt Romney : You'll never balance the budget by raising taxes.
Mitt Romney : Spain -- Spain spends 42 percent of their total economy on government.
Mitt Romney : We're now spending 42 percent of our economy on government.
Mitt Romney : I don't want to go down the path to Spain.
Mitt Romney : I want to go down the path of growth that puts Americans to work with more money coming in because they're working.
Jim Lehrer : But -- but Mr. President, you're saying in order to -- to get the job done, it's got to be balanced.
Jim Lehrer : You've got to have...
Jim Lehrer : (CROSSTALK)
Barack Obama : If -- if we're serious, we've got to take a balanced, responsible approach.
Barack Obama : And by the way, this is not just when it comes to individual taxes.
Barack Obama : Let's talk about corporate taxes.
Barack Obama : Now, I've identified areas where we can, right away, make a change that I believe would actually help the economy.
Barack Obama : The oil industry gets $4 billion a year in corporate welfare.
Barack Obama : Basically, they get deductions that those small businesses that Governor Romney refers to, they don't get.
Barack Obama : Now, does anybody think that ExxonMobil needs some extra money, when they're making money every time you go to the pump?
Barack Obama : Why wouldn't we want to eliminate that?
Barack Obama : Why wouldn't we eliminate tax breaks for corporate jets?
Barack Obama : My attitude is, if you got a corporate jet, you can probably afford to pay full freight, not get a special break for it.
Barack Obama : When it comes to corporate taxes, Governor Romney has said he wants to, in a revenue neutral way, close loopholes, deductions -- he hasn't identified which ones they are -- but that thereby bring down the corporate rate.
Barack Obama : Well, I want to do the same thing, but I've actually identified how we can do that.
Barack Obama : And part of the way to do it is to not give tax breaks to companies that are shipping jobs overseas.
Barack Obama : Right now, you can actually take a deduction for moving a plant overseas.
Barack Obama : I think most Americans would say that doesn't make sense.
Barack Obama : And all that raises revenue.
Barack Obama : And so if we take a balanced approach, what that then allows us to do is also to help young people, the way we already have during my administration, make sure that they can afford to go to college.
Barack Obama : It means that the teacher that I met in Las Vegas, a wonderful young lady, who describes to me -- she's got 42 kids in her class.
Barack Obama : The first two weeks she's got them, some of them sitting on the floor until finally they get reassigned.
Barack Obama : They're using text books that are 10 years old.
Barack Obama : That is not a recipe for growth.
Barack Obama : That's not how America was built.
Barack Obama : And so budgets reflect choices.
Barack Obama : Ultimately, we're going to have to make some decisions.
Barack Obama : And if we're asking for no revenue, then that means that we've got to get rid of a whole bunch of stuff.
Barack Obama : And the magnitude of the tax cuts that you're talking about, Governor, would end up resulting in severe hardship for people, but more importantly, would not help us grow.
Barack Obama : As I indicated before, when you talk about shifting Medicaid to states, we're talking about potentially a 30 -- a 30 percent cut in Medicaid over time.
Barack Obama : Now, you know, that may not seem like a big deal when it just is, you know, numbers on a sheet of paper, but if we're talking about a family who's got an autistic kid and is depending on that Medicaid, that's a big problem.
Barack Obama : And governors are creative.
Barack Obama : There's no doubt about it.
Barack Obama : But they're not creative enough to make up for 30 percent of revenue on something like Medicaid.
Barack Obama : What ends up happening is some people end up not getting help.
Mitt Romney : Jim, let's -- we've gone on a lot of topics there, and so it's going to take a minute to go from Medicaid to schools...
Jim Lehrer : Come back to...
Jim Lehrer : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : ... to oil, to tax breaks, then companies going overseas.
Mitt Romney : So let's go through them one by one.
Mitt Romney : First of all, the Department of Energy has said the tax break for oil companies is $2.8 billion a year.
Mitt Romney : And it's actually an accounting treatment, as you know, that's been in place for a hundred years.
Mitt Romney : Now...
Barack Obama : It's time to end it.
Mitt Romney : And in one year, you provided $90 billion in breaks to the green energy world.
Mitt Romney : Now, I like green energy as well, but that's about 50 years' worth of what oil and gas receives.
Mitt Romney : And you say Exxon and Mobil.
Mitt Romney : Actually, this $2.8 billion goes largely to small companies, to drilling operators and so forth.
Mitt Romney : But, you know, if we get that tax rate from 35 percent down to 25 percent, why that $2.8 billion is on the table.
Mitt Romney : Of course it's on the table.
Mitt Romney : That's probably not going to survive you get that rate down to 25 percent.
Mitt Romney : But don't forget, you put $90 billion, like 50 years' worth of breaks, into -- into solar and wind, to Solyndra and Fisker and Tester and Ener1.
Mitt Romney : I mean, I had a friend who said you don't just pick the winners and losers, you pick the losers, all right?
Mitt Romney : So this -- this is not -- this is not the kind of policy you want to have if you want to get America energy secure.
Mitt Romney : The second topic, which is you said you get a deduction for taking a plant overseas.
Mitt Romney : Look, I've been in business for 25 years.
Mitt Romney : I have no idea what you're talking about.
Mitt Romney : I maybe need to get a new accountant.
Jim Lehrer : Let's...
Mitt Romney : But -- but the idea that you get a break for shipping jobs overseas is simply not the case.
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : What we do have right now is a setting where I'd like to bring money from overseas back to this country.
Mitt Romney : And, finally, Medicaid to states?
Mitt Romney : I'm not quite sure where that came in, except this, which is, I would like to take the Medicaid dollars that go to states and say to a state, you're going to get what you got last year, plus inflation, plus 1 percent, and then you're going to manage your care for your poor in the way you think best.
Mitt Romney : And I remember, as a governor, when this idea was floated by Tommy Thompson, the governors -- Republican and Democrats -- said, please let us do that.
Mitt Romney : We can care for our own poor in so much better and more effective a way than having the federal government tell us how to care for our poor.
Mitt Romney : So -- so let's state -- one of the magnificent things about this country is the whole idea that states are the laboratories of democracy.
Mitt Romney : Don't have the federal government tell everybody what kind of training programs they have to have and what kind of Medicaid they have to have.
Mitt Romney : Let states do this.
Mitt Romney : And, by the way, if a state gets in trouble, well, we can step in and see if we can find a way to help them.
Jim Lehrer : Let's go.
Mitt Romney : But -- but the right -- the right approach is one which relies on the brilliance of our people and states, not the federal government.
Jim Lehrer : (inaudible) and we're going on -- still on the economy, on another -- but another part of it...
Barack Obama : OK.
Jim Lehrer : All right?
Jim Lehrer : All right.
Jim Lehrer : This is segment three, the economy.
Jim Lehrer : Entitlements.
Jim Lehrer : First -- first answer goes to you, two minutes, Mr. President.
Jim Lehrer : Do you see a major difference between the two of you on Social Security?
Barack Obama : You know, I suspect that, on Social Security, we've got a somewhat similar position.
Barack Obama : Social Security is structurally sound.
Barack Obama : It's going to have to be tweaked the way it was by Ronald Reagan and Speaker -- Democratic Speaker Tip O'Neill.
Barack Obama : But it is -- the basic structure is sound.
Barack Obama : But -- but I want to talk about the values behind Social Security and Medicare, and then talk about Medicare, because that's the big driver of our deficits right now.
Barack Obama : You know, my grandmother -- some of you know -- helped to raise me.
Barack Obama : My grandparents did.
Barack Obama : My grandfather died a while back.
Barack Obama : My grandmother died three days before I was elected president.
Barack Obama : And she was fiercely independent.
Barack Obama : She worked her way up, only had a high school education, started as a secretary, ended up being the vice president of a local bank.
Barack Obama : And she ended up living alone by choice.
Barack Obama : And the reason she could be independent was because of Social Security and Medicare.
Barack Obama : She had worked all her life, put in this money, and understood that there was a basic guarantee, a floor under which she could not go.
Barack Obama : And that's the perspective I bring when I think about what's called entitlements.
Barack Obama : You know, the name itself implies some sense of dependency on the part of these folks.
Barack Obama : These are folks who've worked hard, like my grandmother, and there are millions of people out there who are counting on this.
Barack Obama : So my approach is to say, how do we strengthen the system over the long term?
Barack Obama : And in Medicare, what we did was we said, we are going to have to bring down the costs if we're going to deal with our long-term deficits, but to do that, let's look where some of the money's going.
Barack Obama : $716 billion we were able to save from the Medicare program by no longer overpaying insurance companies by making sure that we weren't overpaying providers.
Barack Obama : And using that money, we were actually able to lower prescription drug costs for seniors by an average of $600, and we were also able to make a -- make a significant dent in providing them the kind of preventive care that will ultimately save money through the -- throughout the system.
Barack Obama : So the way for us to deal with Medicare in particular is to lower health care costs.
Barack Obama : When it comes to Social Security, as I said, you don't need a major structural change in order to make sure that Social Security is there for the future.
Jim Lehrer : We'll follow up on this.
Jim Lehrer : First, Governor Romney, you have two minutes on Social Security and entitlements.
Mitt Romney : Well, Jim, our seniors depend on these programs, and I know anytime we talk about entitlements, people become concerned that something's going to happen that's going to change their life for the worse.
Mitt Romney : And the answer is neither the president nor I are proposing any changes for any current retirees or near retirees, either to Social Security or Medicare.
Mitt Romney : So if you're 60 or around 60 or older, you don't need to listen any further.
Mitt Romney : But for younger people, we need to talk about what changes are going to be occurring.
Mitt Romney : Oh, I just thought about one.
Mitt Romney : And that is, in fact, I was wrong when I said the president isn't proposing any changes for current retirees.
Mitt Romney : In fact he is on Medicare.
Mitt Romney : On Social Security he's not.
Mitt Romney : But on Medicare, for current retirees, he's cutting $716 billion from the program.
Mitt Romney : Now, he says by not overpaying hospitals and providers.
Mitt Romney : "Actually just going to them and saying, ""We're going to reduce the rates you get paid across the board, everybody's going to get a lower rate."""
Mitt Romney : That's not just going after places where there's abuse.
Mitt Romney : That's saying we're cutting the rates.
Mitt Romney : Some 15 percent of hospitals and nursing homes say they won't take anymore Medicare patients under that scenario.
Mitt Romney : We also have 50 percent of doctors who say they won't take more Medicare patients.
Mitt Romney : This -- we have 4 million people on Medicare Advantage that will lose Medicare Advantage because of those $716 billion in cuts.
Mitt Romney : I can't understand how you can cut Medicare $716 billion for current recipients of Medicare.
Mitt Romney : Now, you point out, well, we're putting some back.
Mitt Romney : We're going to give a better prescription program.
Mitt Romney : That's $1 -- that's $1 for every $15 you've cut.
Mitt Romney : They're smart enough to know that's not a good trade.
Mitt Romney : I want to take that $716 billion you've cut and put it back into Medicare.
Mitt Romney : By the way, we can include a prescription program if we need to improve it.
Mitt Romney : But the idea of cutting $716 billion from Medicare to be able to balance the additional cost of Obamacare is, in my opinion, a mistake.
Mitt Romney : And with regards to young people coming along, I've got proposals to make sure Medicare and Social Security are there for them without any question.
Jim Lehrer : Mr. President?
Barack Obama : First of all, I think it's important for Governor Romney to present this plan that he says will only affect folks in the future.
Barack Obama : And the essence of the plan is that you would turn Medicare into a voucher program.
Barack Obama : It's called premium support, but it's understood to be a voucher program.
Barack Obama : His running mate...
Jim Lehrer : And you don't support that?
Barack Obama : I don't.
Barack Obama : And let me explain why.
Mitt Romney : Again, that's for future...
Barack Obama : I understand.
Mitt Romney : ... people, right, not for current retirees.
Barack Obama : For -- so if you're -- if you're 54 or 55, you might want to listen 'cause this -- this will affect you.
Barack Obama : The idea, which was originally presented by Congressman Ryan, your running mate, is that we would give a voucher to seniors and they could go out in the private marketplace and buy their own health insurance.
Barack Obama : The problem is that because the voucher wouldn't necessarily keep up with health care inflation, it was estimated that this would cost the average senior about $6,000 a year.
Barack Obama : Now, in fairness, what Governor Romney has now said is he'll maintain traditional Medicare alongside it.
Barack Obama : But there's still a problem, because what happens is, those insurance companies are pretty clever at figuring out who are the younger and healthier seniors.
Barack Obama : They recruit them, leaving the older, sicker seniors in Medicare.
Barack Obama : And every health care economist that looks at it says, over time, what'll happen is the traditional Medicare system will collapse.
Barack Obama : And then what you've got is folks like my grandmother at the mercy of the private insurance system precisely at the time when they are most in need of decent health care.
Barack Obama : So, I don't think vouchers are the right way to go.
Barack Obama : And this is not my own -- only my opinion.
Barack Obama : AARP thinks that the -- the savings that we obtained from Medicare bolster the system, lengthen the Medicare trust fund by eight years.
Barack Obama : Benefits were not affected at all.
Barack Obama : "And ironically, if you repeal Obamacare, and I have become fond of this term, ""Obamacare,"" if you repeal it, what happens is those seniors right away are going to be paying $600 more in prescription care."
Barack Obama : They're now going to have to be paying copays for basic checkups that can keep them healthier.
Barack Obama : And the primary beneficiary of that repeal are insurance companies that are estimated to gain billions of dollars back when they aren't making seniors any healthier.
Barack Obama : And I don't think that's the right approach when it comes to making sure that Medicare is stronger over the long term.
Jim Lehrer : We'll talk about -- specifically about health care in a moment.
Jim Lehrer : But what -- do you support the voucher system, Governor?
Mitt Romney : What I support is no change for current retirees and near-retirees to Medicare.
Mitt Romney : And the president supports taking $716 billion out of that program.
Jim Lehrer : And what about the vouchers?
Jim Lehrer : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : So that's -- that's number one.
Mitt Romney : Number two is for people coming along that are young, what I do to make sure that we can keep Medicare in place for them is to allow them either to choose the current Medicare program or a private plan.
Mitt Romney : Their choice.
Mitt Romney : They get to choose -- and they'll have at least two plans that will be entirely at no cost to them.
Mitt Romney : So they don't have to pay additional money, no additional $6,000.
Mitt Romney : That's not going to happen.
Mitt Romney : They'll have at least two plans.
Mitt Romney : And by the way, if the government can be as efficient as the private sector and offer premiums that are as low as the private sector, people will be happy to get traditional Medicare or they'll be able to get a private plan.
Mitt Romney : I know my own view is I'd rather have a private plan.
Mitt Romney : I'd just assume not have the government telling me what kind of health care I get.
Mitt Romney : I'd rather be able to have an insurance company.
Mitt Romney : If I don't like them, I can get rid of them and find a different insurance company.
Mitt Romney : But people make their own choice.
Mitt Romney : The other thing we have to do to save Medicare?
Mitt Romney : We have to have the benefits high for those that are low income, but for higher income people, we're going to have to lower some of the benefits.
Mitt Romney : We have to make sure this program is there for the long term.
Mitt Romney : That's the plan that I've put forward.
Mitt Romney : And, by the way the idea came not even from Paul Ryan or -- or Senator Wyden, who's the co-author of the bill with -- with Paul Ryan in the Senate, but also it came from Bill -- Bill Clinton's chief of staff.
Mitt Romney : This is an idea that's been around a long time, which is saying, hey, let's see if we can't get competition into the Medicare world so that people can get the choice of different plans at lower cost, better quality.
Mitt Romney : I believe in competition.
Barack Obama : Jim, if I -- if I can just respond very quickly, first of all, every study has shown that Medicare has lower administrative costs than private insurance does, which is why seniors are generally pretty happy with it.
Barack Obama : And private insurers have to make a profit.
Barack Obama : Nothing wrong with that.
Barack Obama : That's what they do.
Barack Obama : And so you've got higher administrative costs, plus profit on top of that.
Barack Obama : And if you are going to save any money through what Governor Romney's proposing, what has to happen is, is that the money has to come from somewhere.
Barack Obama : And when you move to a voucher system, you are putting seniors at the mercy of those insurance companies.
Barack Obama : And over time, if traditional Medicare has decayed or fallen apart, then they're stuck.
Barack Obama : And this is the reason why AARP has said that your plan would weaken Medicare substantially.
Barack Obama : And that's why they were supportive of the approach that we took.
Barack Obama : One last point I want to make.
Barack Obama : We do have to lower the cost of health care, not just in Medicare and Medicaid... 
Barack Obama : ... but -- but -- but overall.
Jim Lehrer : OK.
Barack Obama : And so...
Mitt Romney : That's -- that's a big topic.
Mitt Romney : Can we -- can we stay on Medicare?
Barack Obama : Is that a -- is that a separate topic?
Barack Obama : (CROSSTALK)
Jim Lehrer : Yeah, we're going to -- yeah, I want to get to it.
Barack Obama : I'm sorry.
Jim Lehrer : But all I want to do is go very quickly...
Mitt Romney : Let's get back to Medicare.
Jim Lehrer : ... before we leave the economy...
Mitt Romney : Let's get back to Medicare.
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : The president said that the government can provide the service at lower cost and without a profit.
Jim Lehrer : All right.
Mitt Romney : If that's the case, then it will always be the best product that people can purchase.
Jim Lehrer : Wait a minute, Governor.
Mitt Romney : But my experience -- my experience the private sector typically is able to provide a better product at a lower cost.
Jim Lehrer : All right.
Jim Lehrer : Can we -- can the two of you agree that the voters have a choice -- a clear choice between the two...
Mitt Romney : Absolutely.
Jim Lehrer : ... of you on Medicare?
Mitt Romney : Absolutely.
Barack Obama : Absolutely.
Jim Lehrer : All right.
Jim Lehrer : So to finish quickly, briefly, on the economy, what is your view about the level of federal regulation of the economy right now?
Jim Lehrer : Is there too much?
Jim Lehrer : And in your case, Mr. President, is there -- should there be more?
Jim Lehrer : Beginning with you.
Jim Lehrer : This is not a new two-minute segment to start.
Jim Lehrer : And we'll go for a few minutes, and then we're going to go to health care, OK?
Mitt Romney : Regulation is essential.
Mitt Romney : You can't have a free market work if you don't have regulation.
Mitt Romney : As a businessperson, I had to have -- I need to know the regulations.
Mitt Romney : I needed them there.
Mitt Romney : You couldn't have people opening up banks in their -- in their garage and making loans.
Mitt Romney : I mean, you have to have regulations so that you can have an economy work.
Mitt Romney : Every free economy has good regulation.
Mitt Romney : At the same time, regulation can become excessive.
Jim Lehrer : Is it excessive now, do you think?
Mitt Romney : In some places, yes.
Mitt Romney : Other places, no.
Jim Lehrer : Like where?
Jim Lehrer : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : No, it can become out of date.
Mitt Romney : And what's happened with some of the legislation that's been passed during the president's term, you've seen regulation become excessive, and it's hurt -- it's hurt the economy.
Mitt Romney : Let me give you an example.
Mitt Romney : Dodd-Frank was passed.
Mitt Romney : And it includes within it a number of provisions that I think has some unintended consequences that are harmful to the economy.
Mitt Romney : One is it designates a number of banks as too big to fail, and they're effectively guaranteed by the federal government.
Mitt Romney : This is the biggest kiss that's been given to -- to New York banks I've ever seen.
Mitt Romney : This is an enormous boon for them.
Mitt Romney : There've been 122 community and small banks have closed since Dodd- Frank.
Mitt Romney : So there's one example.
Mitt Romney : Here's another.
Mitt Romney : In Dodd-Frank...
Jim Lehrer : Do you want to repeal Dodd-Frank?
Mitt Romney : Well, I would repeal and replace it.
Mitt Romney : We're not going to get rid of all regulation.
Mitt Romney : You have to have regulation.
Mitt Romney : And there are some parts of Dodd-Frank that make all the sense in the world.
Mitt Romney : You need transparency, you need to have leverage limits for...
Jim Lehrer : Well, here's a specific...
Jim Lehrer : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : But let's -- let's mention -- let me mention the other one.
Mitt Romney : Let's talk...
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Jim Lehrer : No, let's not.
Jim Lehrer : Let's let him respond -- let's let him respond to this specific on Dodd-Frank and what the governor just said.
Barack Obama : I think this is a great example.
Barack Obama : The reason we have been in such a enormous economic crisis was prompted by reckless behavior across the board.
Barack Obama : Now, it wasn't just on Wall Street.
Barack Obama : You had loan officers were -- that were giving loans and mortgages that really shouldn't have been given, because the folks didn't qualify.
Barack Obama : You had people who were borrowing money to buy a house that they couldn't afford.
Barack Obama : You had credit agencies that were stamping these as A1 great investments when they weren't.
Barack Obama : But you also had banks making money hand over fist, churning out products that the bankers themselves didn't even understand, in order to make big profits, but knowing that it made the entire system vulnerable.
Barack Obama : So what did we do?
Barack Obama : We stepped in and had the toughest reforms on Wall Street since the 1930s.
Barack Obama : We said you've got -- banks, you've got to raise your capital requirements.
Barack Obama : You can't engage in some of this risky behavior that is putting Main Street at risk.
Barack Obama : We've going to make sure that you've got to have a living will so -- so we can know how you're going to wind things down if you make a bad bet so we don't have other taxpayer bailouts.
Barack Obama : In the meantime, by the way, we also made sure that all the help that we provided those banks was paid back every single dime, with interest.
Barack Obama : Now, Governor Romney has said he wants to repeal Dodd-Frank.
Barack Obama : And, you know, I appreciate and it appears we've got some agreement that a marketplace to work has to have some regulation.
Barack Obama : But in the past, Governor Romney has said he just want to repeal Dodd- Frank, roll it back.
Barack Obama : And so the question is: Does anybody out there think that the big problem we had is that there was too much oversight and regulation of Wall Street?
Barack Obama : Because if you do, then Governor Romney is your candidate.
Barack Obama : But that's not what I believe.
Mitt Romney : Sorry, but that's just not -- that's just not the facts.
Mitt Romney : Look, we have to have regulation on Wall Street.
Mitt Romney : That's why I'd have regulation.
Mitt Romney : But I wouldn't designate five banks as too big to fail and give them a blank check.
Mitt Romney : That's one of the unintended consequences of Dodd-Frank.
Mitt Romney : It wasn't thought through properly.
Mitt Romney : We need to get rid of that provision because it's killing regional and small banks.
Mitt Romney : They're getting hurt.
Mitt Romney : Let me mention another regulation in Dodd-Frank.
Mitt Romney : You say we were giving mortgages to people who weren't qualified.
Mitt Romney : That's exactly right.
Mitt Romney : It's one of the reasons for the great financial calamity we had.
Mitt Romney : And so Dodd-Frank correctly says we need to have qualified mortgages, and if you give a mortgage that's not qualified, there are big penalties, except they didn't ever go on and define what a qualified mortgage was.
Mitt Romney : It's been two years.
Mitt Romney : We don't know what a qualified mortgage is yet.
Mitt Romney : So banks are reluctant to make loans, mortgages.
Mitt Romney : Try and get a mortgage these days.
Mitt Romney : It's hurt the housing market because Dodd-Frank didn't anticipate putting in place the kinds of regulations you have to have.
Mitt Romney : It's not that Dodd-Frank always was wrong with too much regulation.
Mitt Romney : Sometimes they didn't come out with a clear regulation.
Mitt Romney : I will make sure we don't hurt the functioning of our -- of our marketplace and our business, because I want to bring back housing and get good jobs.
Jim Lehrer : All right.
Jim Lehrer : I think we have another clear difference between the two of you.
Jim Lehrer : Now, let's move to health care where I know there is a clear difference, and that has to do with the Affordable Care Act, Obamacare.
Jim Lehrer : And it's a two-minute new -- new segment, and that means two minutes each.
Jim Lehrer : And you go first, Governor Romney.
Jim Lehrer : You want it repealed.
Jim Lehrer : You want the Affordable Care Act repealed.
Jim Lehrer : Why?
Mitt Romney : I sure do.
Mitt Romney : Well, in part, it comes, again, from my experience.
Mitt Romney : You know, I was in New Hampshire.
Mitt Romney : A woman came to me and she said, look, I can't afford insurance for myself or my son.
Mitt Romney : I met a couple in Appleton, Wisconsin, and they said, we're thinking of dropping our insurance, we can't afford it.
Mitt Romney : And the number of small businesses I've gone to that are saying they're dropping insurance because they can't afford it, the cost of health care is just prohibitive.
Mitt Romney : And -- and we've got to deal with cost.
Mitt Romney : And, unfortunately, when -- when -- when you look at Obamacare, the Congressional Budget Office has said it will cost $2,500 a year more than traditional insurance.
Mitt Romney : So it's adding to cost.
Mitt Romney : And as a matter of fact, when the president ran for office, he said that, by this year, he would have brought down the cost of insurance for each family by $2,500 a family.
Mitt Romney : Instead, it's gone up by that amount.
Mitt Romney : So it's expensive.
Mitt Romney : Expensive things hurt families.
Mitt Romney : So that's one reason I don't want it.
Mitt Romney : Second reason, it cuts $716 billion from Medicare to pay for it.
Mitt Romney : I want to put that money back in Medicare for our seniors.
Mitt Romney : Number three, it puts in place an unelected board that's going to tell people ultimately what kind of treatments they can have.
Mitt Romney : I don't like that idea.
Mitt Romney : Fourth, there was a survey done of small businesses across the country, said, what's been the effect of Obamacare on your hiring plans?
Mitt Romney : And three-quarters of them said it makes us less likely to hire people.
Mitt Romney : I just don't know how the president could have come into office, facing 23 million people out of work, rising unemployment, an economic crisis at the -- at the kitchen table, and spend his energy and passion for two years fighting for Obamacare instead of fighting for jobs for the American people.
Mitt Romney : It has killed jobs.
Mitt Romney : And the best course for health care is to do what we did in my state: craft a plan at the state level that fits the needs of the state.
Mitt Romney : And then let's focus on getting the costs down for people, rather than raising it with the $2,500 additional premium.
Jim Lehrer : Mr. President, the argument against repeal?
Barack Obama : Well, four years ago, when I was running for office, I was traveling around and having those same conversations that Governor Romney talks about.
Barack Obama : And it wasn't just that small businesses were seeing costs skyrocket and they couldn't get affordable coverage even if they wanted to provide it to their employees.
Barack Obama : It wasn't just that this was the biggest driver of our federal deficit, our overall health care costs, but it was families who were worried about going bankrupt if they got sick, millions of families, all across the country.
Barack Obama : If they had a pre-existing condition, they might not be able to get coverage at all.
Barack Obama : If they did have coverage, insurance companies might impose an arbitrary limit.
Barack Obama : And so as a consequence, they're paying their premiums, somebody gets really sick, lo and behold, they don't have enough money to pay the bills, because the insurance companies say that they've hit the limit.
Barack Obama : So we did work on this, alongside working on jobs, because this is part of making sure that middle-class families are secure in this country.
Barack Obama : And let me tell you exactly what Obamacare did.
Barack Obama : Number one, if you've got health insurance, it doesn't mean a government takeover.
Barack Obama : You keep your own insurance.
Barack Obama : You keep your own doctor.
Barack Obama : But it does say insurance companies can't jerk you around.
Barack Obama : They can't impose arbitrary lifetime limits.
Barack Obama : They have to let you keep your kid on their insurance -- your insurance plan until you're 26 years old.
Barack Obama : And it also says that you're going to have to get rebates if insurance companies are spending more on administrative costs and profits than they are on actual care.
Barack Obama : Number two, if you don't have health insurance, we're essentially setting up a group plan that allows you to benefit from group rates that are typically 18 percent lower than if you're out there trying to get insurance on the individual market.
Barack Obama : Now, the last point I'd make before...
Jim Lehrer : Two minutes -- two minutes is up, sir.
Barack Obama : No, I think -- I had five seconds before you interrupted me, was ...
Barack Obama : (LAUGHTER)
Barack Obama : ... the irony is that we've seen this model work really well in Massachusetts, because Governor Romney did a good thing, working with Democrats in the state to set up what is essentially the identical model and as a consequence people are covered there.
Barack Obama : It hasn't destroyed jobs.
Barack Obama : And as a consequence, we now have a system in which we have the opportunity to start bringing down costs, as opposed to just leaving millions of people out in the cold.
Jim Lehrer : Your five seconds went away a long time ago.
Jim Lehrer : All right, Governor.
Jim Lehrer : Governor, tell -- tell the president directly why you think what he just said is wrong about Obamacare?
Mitt Romney : Well, I did with my first statement.
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : First of all, I like the way we did it in Massachusetts.
Mitt Romney : I like the fact that in my state, we had Republicans and Democrats come together and work together.
Mitt Romney : What you did instead was to push through a plan without a single Republican vote.
Mitt Romney : As a matter of fact, when Massachusetts did something quite extraordinary -- elected a Republican senator to stop Obamacare, you pushed it through anyway.
Mitt Romney : So entirely on a partisan basis, instead of bringing America together and having a discussion on this important topic, you pushed through something that you and Nancy Pelosi and Harry Reid thought was the best answer and drove it through.
Mitt Romney : What we did in a legislature 87 percent Democrat, we worked together; 200 legislators in my legislature, only two voted against the plan by the time we were finished.
Mitt Romney : What were some differences?
Mitt Romney : We didn't raise taxes.
Mitt Romney : You've raised them by $1 trillion under Obamacare.
Mitt Romney : We didn't cut Medicare.
Mitt Romney : Of course, we don't have Medicare, but we didn't cut Medicare by $716 billion.
Mitt Romney : We didn't put in place a board that can tell people ultimately what treatments they're going to receive.
Mitt Romney : We didn't also do something that I think a number of people across this country recognize, which is put -- put people in a position where they're going to lose the insurance they had and they wanted.
Mitt Romney : Right now, the CBO says up to 20 million people will lose their insurance as Obamacare goes into effect next year.
Mitt Romney : And likewise, a study by McKinsey and Company of American businesses said 30 percent of them are anticipating dropping people from coverage.
Mitt Romney : So for those reasons, for the tax, for Medicare, for this board, and for people losing their insurance, this is why the American people don't want Medicare -- don't want Obamacare.
Mitt Romney : It's why Republicans said, do not do this, and the Republicans had -- had the plan.
Mitt Romney : They put a plan out.
Mitt Romney : They put out a plan, a bipartisan plan.
Mitt Romney : It was swept aside.
Mitt Romney : I think something this big, this important has to be done on a bipartisan basis.
Mitt Romney : And we have to have a president who can reach across the aisle and fashion important legislation with the input from both parties.
Barack Obama : Governor Romney said this has to be done on a bipartisan basis.
Barack Obama : This was a bipartisan idea.
Barack Obama : In fact, it was a Republican idea.
Barack Obama : And Governor Romney at the beginning of this debate wrote and said what we did in Massachusetts could be a model for the nation.
Barack Obama : And I agree that the Democratic legislators in Massachusetts might have given some advice to Republicans in Congress about how to cooperate, but the fact of the matter is, we used the same advisers, and they say it's the same plan.
Barack Obama : It -- when Governor Romney talks about this board, for example, unelected board that we've created, what this is, is a group of health care experts, doctors, et cetera, to figure out, how can we reduce the cost of care in the system overall?
Barack Obama : Because there -- there are two ways of dealing with our health care crisis.
Barack Obama : One is to simply leave a whole bunch of people uninsured and let them fend for themselves, to let businesses figure out how long they can continue to pay premiums until finally they just give up, and their workers are no longer getting insured, and that's been the trend line.
Barack Obama : Or, alternatively, we can figure out, how do we make the cost of care more effective?
Barack Obama : And there are ways of doing it.
Barack Obama : So at Cleveland Clinic, one of the best health care systems in the world, they actually provide great care cheaper than average.
Barack Obama : And the reason they do is because they do some smart things.
Barack Obama : They -- they say, if a patient's coming in, let's get all the doctors together at once, do one test instead of having the patient run around with 10 tests.
Barack Obama : Let's make sure that we're providing preventive care so we're catching the onset of something like diabetes.
Barack Obama : Let's -- let's pay providers on the basis of performance as opposed to on the basis of how many procedures they've -- they've engaged in.
Barack Obama : Now, so what this board does is basically identifies best practices and says, let's use the purchasing power of Medicare and Medicaid to help to institutionalize all these good things that we do.
Barack Obama : And the fact of the matter is that, when Obamacare is fully implemented, we're going to be in a position to show that costs are going down.
Barack Obama : And over the last two years, health care premiums have gone up -- it's true -- but they've gone up slower than any time in the last 50 years.
Barack Obama : So we're already beginning to see progress.
Barack Obama : In the meantime, folks out there with insurance, you're already getting a rebate.
Barack Obama : Let me make one last point.
Barack Obama : Governor Romney says, we should replace it, I'm just going to repeal it, but -- but we can replace it with something.
Barack Obama : But the problem is, he hasn't described what exactly we'd replace it with, other than saying we're going to leave it to the states.
Barack Obama : But the fact of the matter is that some of the prescriptions that he's offered, like letting you buy insurance across state lines, there's no indication that that somehow is going to help somebody who's got a pre-existing condition be able to finally buy insurance.
Barack Obama : In fact, it's estimated that by repealing Obamacare, you're looking at 50 million people losing health insurance...
Jim Lehrer : Let's...
Barack Obama : ... at a time when it's vitally important.
Jim Lehrer : Let's let the governor explain what you would do...
Mitt Romney : Well...
Jim Lehrer : ... if Obamacare is repealed.
Jim Lehrer : How would you replace it?
Jim Lehrer : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : Well, actually it's -- it's -- it's a lengthy description.
Mitt Romney : But, number one, preexisting conditions are covered under my plan.
Mitt Romney : Number two, young people are able to stay on their family plan.
Mitt Romney : That's already offered in the private marketplace.
Mitt Romney : You don't have to have the government mandate that for that to occur.
Mitt Romney : But let's come back to something the president and I agree on, which is the key task we have in health care is to get the cost down so it's more affordable for families.
Mitt Romney : And then he has as a model for doing that a board of people at the government, an unelected board, appointed board, who are going to decide what kind of treatment you ought to have.
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : In my opinion, the government is not effective in -- in bringing down the cost of almost anything.
Mitt Romney : As a matter of fact, free people and free enterprises trying to find ways to do things better are able to be more effective in bringing down the cost than the government will ever be.
Mitt Romney : Your example of the Cleveland Clinic is my case in point, along with several others I could describe.
Mitt Romney : This is the private market.
Mitt Romney : These are small -- these are enterprises competing with each other, learning how to do better and better jobs.
Mitt Romney : I used to consult to businesses -- excuse me, to hospitals and to health care providers.
Mitt Romney : I was astonished at the creativity and innovation that exists in the American people.
Mitt Romney : In order to bring the cost of health care down, we don't need to have a board of 15 people telling us what kinds of treatments we should have.
Mitt Romney : We instead need to put insurance plans, providers, hospitals, doctors on target such that they have an incentive, as you say, performance pay, for doing an excellent job, for keeping costs down, and that's happening.
Mitt Romney : Innermountain Healthcare does it superbly well, Mayo Clinic is doing it superbly well, Cleveland Clinic, others.
Mitt Romney : But the right answer is not to have the federal government take over health care and start mandating to the providers across America, telling a patient and a doctor what kind of treatment they can have.
Mitt Romney : That's the wrong way to go.
Mitt Romney : The private market and individual responsibility always work best.
Barack Obama : Let me just point out first of all this board that we're talking about can't make decisions about what treatments are given.
Barack Obama : That's explicitly prohibited in the law.
Barack Obama : But let's go back to what Governor Romney indicated, that under his plan, he would be able to cover people with preexisting conditions.
Barack Obama : Well, actually Governor, that isn't what your plan does.
Barack Obama : What your plan does is to duplicate what's already the law, which says if you are out of health insurance for three months, then you can end up getting continuous coverage and an insurance company can't deny you if you've -- if it's been under 90 days.
Barack Obama : But that's already the law and that doesn't help the millions of people out there with preexisting conditions.
Barack Obama : There's a reason why Governor Romney set up the plan that he did in Massachusetts.
Barack Obama : It wasn't a government takeover of health care.
Barack Obama : It was the largest expansion of private insurance.
Barack Obama : "But what it does say is that ""insurers, you've got to take everybody."""
Barack Obama : Now, that also means that you've got more customers.
Barack Obama : But when -- when Governor Romney says that he'll replace it with something, but can't detail how it will be in fact replaced and the reason he set up the system he did in Massachusetts was because there isn't a better way of dealing with the preexisting conditions problem.
Barack Obama : It just reminds me of, you know, he says that he's going to close deductions and loopholes for his tax plan.
Barack Obama : That's how it's going to be paid for, but we don't know the details.
Barack Obama : He says that he's going to replace Dodd-Frank, Wall Street reform, but we don't know exactly which ones.
Barack Obama : He won't tell us.
Barack Obama : He now says he's going to replace Obamacare and ensure that all the good things that are in it are going to be in there and you don't have to worry.
Barack Obama : And at some point, I think the American people have to ask themselves, is the reason that Governor Romney is keeping all these plans to replace secret because they're too good?
Barack Obama : Is it -- is it because that somehow middle-class families are going to benefit too much from them?
Barack Obama : No.
Barack Obama : The reason is, is because, when we reform Wall Street, when we tackle the problem of pre-existing conditions, then, you know, these are tough problems and we've got to make choices.
Barack Obama : And the choices we've made have been ones that ultimately are benefiting middle-class families all across the country.
Jim Lehrer : We're going to move to...
Mitt Romney : No.
Mitt Romney : I -- I have to respond to that.
Jim Lehrer : No, but...
Mitt Romney : "Which is -- which is my experience as a governor is if I come in and -- and lay down a piece of legislation and say, ""It's my way or the highway,"" I don't get a lot done."
Mitt Romney : What I do is the same way that Tip O'Neill and Ronald Reagan worked together some years ago.
Mitt Romney : When Ronald Reagan ran for office, he laid out the principles that he was going to foster.
Mitt Romney : He said he was going to lower tax rates.
Mitt Romney : He said he was going to broaden the base.
Mitt Romney : You've said the same thing, you're going to simplify the tax code, broaden the base.
Mitt Romney : Those are my principles.
Mitt Romney : I want to bring down the tax burden on middle-income families.
Mitt Romney : And I'm going to work together with Congress to say, OK, what -- what are the various ways we could bring down deductions, for instance?
Mitt Romney : One way, for instance, would be to have a single number.
Mitt Romney : Make up a number, $25,000, $50,000.
Mitt Romney : Anybody can have deductions up to that amount.
Mitt Romney : And then that number disappears for high-income people.
Mitt Romney : That's one way one could do it.
Mitt Romney : One could follow Bowles-Simpson as a model and take deduction by deduction and make differences that way.
Mitt Romney : There are alternatives to accomplish the objective I have, which is to bring down rates, broaden the base, simplify the code, and create incentives for growth.
Mitt Romney : And with regards to health care, you had remarkable details with regards to my pre-existing condition plan.
Mitt Romney : You obviously studied up on -- on my plan.
Mitt Romney : In fact, I do have a plan that deals with people with pre-existing conditions.
Mitt Romney : That's part of my health care plan.
Mitt Romney : And what we did in Massachusetts is a model for the nation state by state.
Mitt Romney : And I said that at that time.
Mitt Romney : The federal government taking over health care for the entire nation and whisking aside the 10th Amendment, which gives states the rights for these kinds of things, is not the course for America to have a stronger, more vibrant economy.
Jim Lehrer : That is a terrific segue to our next segment, and is the role of government.
Jim Lehrer : And -- and let's see.
Jim Lehrer : Role of government.
Jim Lehrer : And it is -- you are first on this, Mr. President.
Jim Lehrer : And the question is this.
Jim Lehrer : Do you believe, both of you -- but you had the first two minutes on this, Mr. President -- do you believe there's a fundamental difference between the two of you as to how you view the mission of the federal government?
Barack Obama : Well, I definitely think there are differences.
Jim Lehrer : And do you -- yeah.
Barack Obama : The first role of the federal government is to keep the American people safe.
Barack Obama : That's its most basic function.
Barack Obama : And as commander-in-chief, that is something that I've worked on and thought about every single day that I've been in the Oval Office.
Barack Obama : But I also believe that government has the capacity, the federal government has the capacity to help open up opportunity and create ladders of opportunity and to create frameworks where the American people can succeed.
Barack Obama : Look, the genius of America is the free enterprise system and freedom and the fact that people can go out there and start a business, work on an idea, make their own decisions.
Barack Obama : But as Abraham Lincoln understood, there are also some things we do better together.
Barack Obama : So, in the middle of the Civil War, Abraham Lincoln said, let's help to finance the Transcontinental Railroad, let's start the National Academy of Sciences, let's start land grant colleges, because we want to give these gateways of opportunity for all Americans, because if all Americans are getting opportunity, we're all going to be better off.
Barack Obama : That doesn't restrict people's freedom.
Barack Obama : That enhances it.
Barack Obama : And so what I've tried to do as president is to apply those same principles.
Barack Obama : And when it comes to education what I've said is we've got to reform schools that are not working.
Barack Obama : We use something called Race to the Top.
Barack Obama : Wasn't a top-down approach, Governor.
Barack Obama : What we've said is to states, we'll give you more money if you initiate reforms.
Barack Obama : And as a consequence, you had 46 states around the country who have made a real difference.
Barack Obama : But what I've also said is let's hire another 100,000 math and science teachers to make sure we maintain our technological lead and our people are skilled and able to succeed.
Barack Obama : And hard-pressed states right now can't all do that.
Barack Obama : In fact we've seen layoffs of hundreds of thousands of teachers over the last several years, and Governor Romney doesn't think we need more teachers.
Barack Obama : I do, because I think that that is the kind of investment where the federal government can help.
Barack Obama : It can't do it all, but it can make a difference.
Barack Obama : And as a consequence we'll have a better trained workforce and that will create jobs because companies want to locate in places where we've got a skilled workforce.
Jim Lehrer : Two minutes, Governor, on the role of government.
Jim Lehrer : Your view?
Mitt Romney : Well, first, I love great schools.
Mitt Romney : Massachusetts, our schools are ranked number one of all 50 states.
Mitt Romney : And the key to great schools, great teachers.
Mitt Romney : So I reject the idea that I don't believe in great teachers or more teachers.
Mitt Romney : Every school district, every state should make that decision on their own.
Mitt Romney : The role of government: Look behind us.
Mitt Romney : The Constitution and the Declaration of Independence.
Mitt Romney : The role of government is to promote and protect the principles of those documents.
Mitt Romney : First, life and liberty.
Mitt Romney : We have a responsibility to protect the lives and liberties of our people, and that means a military second to none.
Mitt Romney : I do not believe in cutting our military.
Mitt Romney : I believe in maintaining the strength of America's military.
Mitt Romney : Second, in that line that says we are endowed by our creator with our rights, I believe we must maintain our commitment to religious tolerance and freedom in this country.
Mitt Romney : That statement also says that we are endowed by our creator with the right to pursue happiness as we choose.
Mitt Romney : I interpret that as, one, making sure that those people who are less fortunate and can't care for themselves are cared by -- by one another.
Mitt Romney : We're a nation that believes that we're all children of the same god and we care for those that have difficulties, those that are elderly and have problems and challenges, those that are disabled.
Mitt Romney : We care for them.
Mitt Romney : And we -- we look for discovery and innovation, all these things desired out of the American heart to provide the pursuit of happiness for our citizens.
Mitt Romney : But we also believe in maintaining for individuals the right to pursue their dreams and not to have the government substitute itself for the rights of free individuals.
Mitt Romney : And what we're seeing right now is, in my view, a -- a trickle-down government approach, which has government thinking it can do a better job than free people pursuing their dreams.
Mitt Romney : And it's not working.
Mitt Romney : And the proof of that is 23 million people out of work.
Mitt Romney : The proof of that is 1 out of 6 people in poverty.
Mitt Romney : The proof of that is we've gone from 32 million on food stamps to 47 million on food stamps.
Mitt Romney : The proof of that is that 50 percent of college graduates this year can't find work.
Jim Lehrer : All right.
Mitt Romney : We know that the path we're taking is not working.
Mitt Romney : It's time for a new path.
Jim Lehrer : All right.
Jim Lehrer : Let's go through some specifics in terms of what -- how each of you views the role of government.
Jim Lehrer : How do -- education.
Jim Lehrer : Does the federal government have a responsibility to improve the quality of public education in America?
Mitt Romney : Well, the primary responsibility for education is -- is, of course, at the state and local level.
Mitt Romney : But the federal government also can play a very important role.
Mitt Romney : And I -- and I agree with Secretary Arne Duncan, he's -- some ideas he's put forward on Race to the Top, not all of them, but some of them I agree with and -- and congratulate him for pursuing that.
Mitt Romney : The federal government can get local and -- and state schools to do a better job.
Mitt Romney : My own view, by the way, is I've added to that.
Mitt Romney : I happen to believe, I want the kids that are getting federal dollars from IDEA or Title I -- these are disabled kids or -- or -- or poor kids or -- or lower-income kids, rather, I want them to be able to go to the school of their choice.
Mitt Romney : So all federal funds, instead of going to the -- to the state or to the school district, I'd have go, if you will, follow the child and let the parent and the child decide where to send their -- their -- their student.
Jim Lehrer : How do you see the federal government's responsibility to, as I say, to improve the quality of public education in this country?
Barack Obama : Well, as I've indicated, I think that it has a significant role to play.
Barack Obama : Through our Race to the Top program, we've worked with Republican and Democratic governors to initiate major reforms, and they're having an impact right now.
Jim Lehrer : Do you think you have a difference with your views and -- and those of Governor Romney on -- about education and the federal government?
Barack Obama : You know, this is where budgets matter, because budgets reflect choices.
Barack Obama : So when Governor Romney indicates that he wants to cut taxes and potentially benefit folks like me and him, and to pay for it we're having to initiate significant cuts in federal support for education, that makes a difference.
Barack Obama : You know, his -- his running mate, Congressman Ryan, put forward a budget that reflects many of the principles that Governor Romney's talked about.
Barack Obama : And it wasn't very detailed.
Barack Obama : This seems to be a trend.
Barack Obama : But -- but what it did do is to -- if you extrapolated how much money we're talking about, you'd look at cutting the education budget by up to 20 percent.
Barack Obama : When it comes to community colleges, we are seeing great work done out there all over the country because we have the opportunity to train people for jobs that exist right now.
Barack Obama : And one of the things I suspect Governor Romney and I probably agree on is getting businesses to work with community colleges so that they're setting up their training programs...
Jim Lehrer : Do you -- do you agree, Governor?
Barack Obama : Let me just finish the point.
Barack Obama : (CROSSTALK)
Barack Obama : The -- where they're partnering so that they're designing training programs.
Barack Obama : And people who are going through them know that there's a job waiting for them if they complete it.
Barack Obama : That makes a big difference, but that requires some federal support.
Barack Obama : Let me just say one final example.
Barack Obama : When it comes to making college affordable, whether it's two-year or four-year, one of the things that I did as president was we were sending $60 billion to banks and lenders as middlemen for the student loan program, even though the loans were guaranteed.
Barack Obama : So there was no risk for the banks or the lenders, but they were taking billions out of the system.
Barack Obama : "And we said, ""Why not cut out the middleman?"""
Barack Obama : And as a consequence, what we've been able to do is to provide millions more students assistance, lower or keep low interest rates on student loans.
Barack Obama : And this is an example of where our priorities make a difference.
Barack Obama : "Governor Romney, I genuinely believe cares about education, but when he tells a student that, you know, ""you should borrow money from your parents to go to college,"" you know, that indicates the degree to which, you know, there may not be as much of a focus on the fact that folks like myself, folks like Michelle, kids probably who attend University of Denver, just don't have that option."
Barack Obama : And for us to be able to make sure that they've got that opportunity and they can walk through that door, that is vitally important not just to those kids.
Barack Obama : It's how we're going to grow this economy over the long term.
Jim Lehrer : We're running out of time, gentlemen.
Jim Lehrer : (CROSSTALK)
Jim Lehrer : Governor?
Mitt Romney : Mr. President, Mr. President, you're entitled as the president to your own airplane and to your own house, but not to your own facts.
Mitt Romney : All right, I'm not going to cut education funding.
Mitt Romney : I don't have any plan to cut education funding and -- and grants that go to people going to college.
Mitt Romney : I'm planning on (inaudible) to grow.
Mitt Romney : So I'm not planning on making changes there.
Mitt Romney : But you make a very good point, which is that the place you put your money just makes a pretty clear indication of where your heart is.
Mitt Romney : You put $90 billion into -- into green jobs.
Mitt Romney : And I -- look, I'm all in favor of green energy.
Mitt Romney : $90 billion, that would have -- that would have hired 2 million teachers.
Mitt Romney : $90 billion.
Mitt Romney : And these businesses, many of them have gone out of business, I think about half of them, of the ones have been invested in have gone out of business.
Mitt Romney : A number of them happened to be owned by people who were contributors to your campaigns.
Mitt Romney : Look, the right course for America's government, we were talking about the role of government, is not to become the economic player, picking winners and losers, telling people what kind of health treatment they can receive, taking over the health care system that has existed in this country for a long, long time and has produced the best health records in the world.
Mitt Romney : The right answer for government is say, How do we make the private sector become more efficient and more effective?
Mitt Romney : How do we get schools to be more competitive?
Mitt Romney : Let's grade them.
Mitt Romney : I propose we grade our schools so parents know which schools are succeeding and failing, so they can take their child to a -- to a school that he's being more successful.
Mitt Romney : I don't want to cut our commitment to education.
Mitt Romney : I wanted to make it more effective and efficient.
Mitt Romney : And by the way, I've had that experience.
Mitt Romney : I don't just talk about it.
Mitt Romney : I've been there.
Mitt Romney : Massachusetts schools are ranked number one in the nation.
Mitt Romney : This is not because I didn't have commitment to education.
Mitt Romney : It's because I care about education for all of our kids.
Jim Lehrer : All right, gentlemen...
Jim Lehrer : (CROSSTALK)
Jim Lehrer : Excuse me (inaudible).
Jim Lehrer : Excuse me, sir.
Jim Lehrer : We've got -- we've got -- barely have three minutes left.
Jim Lehrer : I'm not going to grade the two of you and say your answers have been too long or I've done a poor job.
Barack Obama : You've done a great job.
Jim Lehrer : Oh, well, no.
Jim Lehrer : But the fact is government -- the role of government and governing, we've lost a pod in other words.
Jim Lehrer : So we only have three -- three minutes left in the -- in the debate before we go to your closing statements.
Jim Lehrer : And so I want to ask finally here, and remember, we've got three minutes total time here -- and the question is this.
Jim Lehrer : Many of the legislative functions of the federal government right now are in a state of paralysis as a result of partisan gridlock.
Jim Lehrer : If elected, in your case, if re-elected, in your case, what would you do about that?
Jim Lehrer : Governor?
Mitt Romney : Jim, I had the great experience -- it didn't seem like it at the time -- of being elected in a state where my legislature was 87 percent Democrat.
Mitt Romney : And that meant I figured out from day one I had to get along and I had to work across the aisle to get anything done.
Mitt Romney : We drove our schools to be number one in the nation.
Mitt Romney : We cut taxes 19 times.
Jim Lehrer : But what would you do as president?
Mitt Romney : We -- as president, I will sit on day one -- actually, the day after I get elected -- I'll sit down with leaders -- the Democratic leaders, as well as Republican leaders, and continue -- as we did in my state -- we met every Monday for a couple hours, talked about the issues and the challenges in the -- in the -- in our state in that case.
Mitt Romney : We have to work on a collaborative basis, not because we're going to compromise our principle, but because there's common ground.
Mitt Romney : And the challenges America faces right now -- look, the reason I'm in this race is there are people that are really hurting today in this country.
Mitt Romney : And we face -- this deficit could crush the future generations.
Mitt Romney : What's happening in the Middle East, there are developments around the world that are of real concern.
Jim Lehrer : All right.
Mitt Romney : And Republicans and Democrats both love America.
Mitt Romney : But we need to have leadership -- leadership in Washington that will actually bring people together and get the job done and could not care less if -- if it's a Republican or a Democrat.
Mitt Romney : I've done it before.
Mitt Romney : I'll do it again.
Jim Lehrer : Mr. President?
Barack Obama : Well, first of all, I think Governor Romney's going to have a busy first day, because he's also going to repeal Obamacare, which will not be very popular among Democrats as you're sitting down with them.
Barack Obama : (LAUGHTER)
Barack Obama : But, look, my philosophy has been, I will take ideas from anybody, Democrat or Republican, as long as they're advancing the cause of making middle-class families stronger and giving ladders of opportunity to the middle class.
Barack Obama : That's how we cut taxes for middle- class families and small businesses.
Barack Obama : That's how we cut a trillion dollars of spending that wasn't advancing that cause.
Barack Obama : That's how we signed three trade deals into law that are helping us to double our exports and sell more American products around the world.
Barack Obama : "That's how we repealed ""don't ask/don't tell."""
Barack Obama : That's how we ended the war in Iraq, as I promised, and that's how we're going to wind down the war in Afghanistan.
Barack Obama : That's how we went after Al Qaida and bin Laden.
Barack Obama : So we've -- we've seen progress even under Republican control of the House of Representatives.
Barack Obama : "But, ultimately, part of being principled, part of being a leader is, A, being able to describe exactly what it is that you intend to do, not just saying, ""I'll sit down,"" but you have to have a plan."
Barack Obama : Number two, what's important is occasionally you've got to say no, to -- to -- to folks both in your own party and in the other party.
Barack Obama : And, you know, yes, have we had some fights between me and the Republicans when -- when they fought back against us reining in the excesses of Wall Street?
Barack Obama : Absolutely, because that was a fight that needed to be had.
Barack Obama : When -- when we were fighting about whether or not we were going to make sure that Americans had more security with their health insurance and they said no, yes, that was a fight that we needed to have.
Jim Lehrer : All right
Barack Obama : And so part of leadership and governing is both saying what it is that you are for, but also being willing to say no to some things.
Barack Obama : And I've got to tell you, Governor Romney, when it comes to his own party during the course of this campaign, has not displayed that willingness to say no to some of the more extreme parts of his party.
Jim Lehrer : That brings us to closing statements.
Jim Lehrer : It was a coin toss.
Jim Lehrer : Governor Romney, you won the toss and you elected to go last, so you have a closing two minutes, Mr. President.
Barack Obama : Well, Jim, I want to thank you, and I want to thank Governor Romney, because I think was a terrific debate, and I very much appreciate it.
Barack Obama : And I want to thank the University of Denver.
Barack Obama : You know, four years ago, we were going through a major crisis.
Barack Obama : And yet my faith and confidence in the American future is undiminished.
Barack Obama : And the reason is because of its people, because of the woman I met in North Carolina who decided at 55 to go back to school because she wanted to inspire her daughter and now has a job from that new training that she's gotten; because a company in Minnesota who was willing to give up salaries and perks for their executives to make sure that they didn't lay off workers during a recession.
Barack Obama : The auto workers that you meet in Toledo or Detroit take such pride in building the best cars in the world, not just because of a paycheck, but because it gives them that sense of pride, that they're helping to build America.
Barack Obama : And so the question now is how do we build on those strengths.
Barack Obama : And everything that I've tried to do, and everything that I'm now proposing for the next four years in terms of improving our education system or developing American energy or making sure that we're closing loopholes for companies that are shipping jobs overseas and focusing on small businesses and companies that are creating jobs here in the United States, or closing our deficit in a responsible, balanced way that allows us to invest in our future.
Barack Obama : All those things are designed to make sure that the American people, their genius, their grit, their determination, is -- is channeled and -- and they have an opportunity to succeed.
Barack Obama : And everybody's getting a fair shot.
Barack Obama : And everybody's getting a fair share -- everybody's doing a fair share, and everybody's playing by the same rules.
Barack Obama : You know, four years ago, I said that I'm not a perfect man and I wouldn't be a perfect president.
Barack Obama : And that's probably a promise that Governor Romney thinks I've kept.
Barack Obama : But I also promised that I'd fight every single day on behalf of the American people, the middle class, and all those who were striving to get into the middle class.
Barack Obama : I've kept that promise and if you'll vote for me, then I promise I'll fight just as hard in a second term.
Jim Lehrer : Governor Romney, your two-minute closing.
Mitt Romney : Thank you, Jim, and Mr. President.
Mitt Romney : And thank you for tuning in this evening.
Mitt Romney : This is a -- this is an important election and I'm concerned about America.
Mitt Romney : I'm concerned about the direction America has been taking over the last four years.
Mitt Romney : I -- I know this is bigger than an election about the two of us as individuals.
Mitt Romney : It's bigger than our respective parties.
Mitt Romney : It's an election about the course of America.
Mitt Romney : What kind of America do you want to have for yourself and for your children.
Mitt Romney : And there really are two very different paths that we began speaking about this evening, and over the course of this month we're going to have two more presidential debates and a vice presidential debate.
Mitt Romney : We're talk about those two paths.
Mitt Romney : But they lead in very different directions.
Mitt Romney : And it's not just looking to our words that you have to take in evidence of where they go.
Mitt Romney : You can look at the record.
Mitt Romney : There's no question in my mind that if the president were to be reelected you'll continue to see a middle-class squeeze with incomes going down and prices going up.
Mitt Romney : I'll get incomes up again.
Mitt Romney : You'll see chronic unemployment.
Mitt Romney : We've had 43 straight months with unemployment above 8 percent.
Mitt Romney : If I'm president I will create -- help create 12 million new jobs in this country with rising incomes.
Mitt Romney : If the president's reelected, Obamacare will be fully installed.
Mitt Romney : In my view that's going to mean a whole different way of life for people who counted on the insurance plan they had in the past.
Mitt Romney : Many will lose it.
Mitt Romney : You're going to see health premiums go up by some $2,500 per family.
Mitt Romney : If I'm elected we won't have Obama.
Mitt Romney : We'll put in place the kind of principles that I put in place in my own state and allow each state to craft their own programs to get people insured and we'll focus on getting the cost of health care down.
Mitt Romney : If the president were to be reelected you're going to see a $716 billion cut to Medicare.
Mitt Romney : You'll have 4 million people who will lose Medicare Advantage.
Mitt Romney : You'll have hospital and providers that'll no longer accept Medicare patients.
Mitt Romney : I'll restore that $716 billion to Medicare.
Mitt Romney : And finally, military.
Mitt Romney : The president's reelected you'll see dramatic cuts to our military.
Mitt Romney : The secretary of defense has said these would be even devastating.
Mitt Romney : I will not cut our commitment to our military.
Mitt Romney : I will keep America strong and get America's middle class working again.
Mitt Romney : Thank you, Jim.
Jim Lehrer : Thank you, Governor.
Jim Lehrer : Thank you, Mr. President.
Jim Lehrer : The next debate will be the vice presidential event on Thursday, October 11th at Centre College in Danville, Kentucky.
Jim Lehrer : For now, from the University of Denver, I'm Jim Lehrer.
Jim Lehrer : Thank you, and good night.
