Information : PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA AND FORMER GOV.
Information : MITT ROMNEY
Information : PARTICIPATE IN A CANDIDATES DEBATE, HOFSTRA UNIVERSITY,
Information : HEMPSTEAD, NEW YORK
Information : OCTOBER 16, 2012
Information : SPEAKERS: FORMER GOV.
Information : MITT ROMNEY, R-MASS.
Information : PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA
Information : CANDY CROWLEY, MODERATOR
Candy Crowley : Good evening from Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York.
Candy Crowley : "I'm Candy Crowley from CNN's ""State of the Union."""
Candy Crowley : We are here for the second presidential debate, a town hall, sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates.
Candy Crowley : The Gallup organization chose 82 uncommitted voters from the New York area.
Candy Crowley : Their questions will drive the night.
Candy Crowley : My goal is to give the conversation direction and to ensure questions get answered.
Candy Crowley : The questions are known to me and my team only.
Candy Crowley : Neither the commission, nor the candidates have seen them.
Candy Crowley : I hope to get to as many questions as possible.
Candy Crowley : And because I am the optimistic sort, I'm sure the candidates will oblige by keeping their answers concise and on point.
Candy Crowley : Each candidate has as much as two minutes to respond to a common question, and there will be a two-minute follow-up.
Candy Crowley : The audience here in the hall has agreed to be polite and attentive -- no cheering or booing or outbursts of any sort.
Candy Crowley : We will set aside that agreement just this once to welcome President Barack Obama and Governor Mitt Romney.
Candy Crowley : (APPLAUSE)
Candy Crowley : Gentlemen, thank you both for joining us here tonight.
Candy Crowley : We have a lot of folks who've been waiting all day to talk to you, so I want to get right to it.
Candy Crowley : Governor Romney, as you know, you won the coin toss, so the first question will go to you.
Candy Crowley : And I want to turn to a first-time voter, Jeremy Epstein, who has a question for you.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Mr. President, Governor Romney, as a 20-year-old college student, all I hear from professors, neighbors and others is that when I graduate, I will have little chance to get employment.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : What can you say to reassure me, but more importantly my parents, that I will be able to sufficiently support myself after I graduate?
Mitt Romney : Thank you, Jeremy.
Mitt Romney : I appreciate your -- your question, and thank you for being here this evening and to all of those from Nassau County that have come, thank you for your time.
Mitt Romney : Thank you to Hofstra University and to Candy Crowley for organizing and leading this -- this event.
Mitt Romney : Thank you, Mr. President, also for being part of this -- this debate.
Mitt Romney : Your question -- your question is one that's being asked by college kids all over this country.
Mitt Romney : "I was in Pennsylvania with someone who had just graduated -- this was in Philadelphia -- and she said, ""I've got my degree."
Mitt Romney : I can't find a job.
Mitt Romney : I've got three part- time jobs.
Mitt Romney : They're just barely enough to pay for my food and pay for an apartment.
Mitt Romney : "I can't begin to pay back my student loans."""
Mitt Romney : So what we have to do is two things.
Mitt Romney : We have to make sure that we make it easier for kids to afford college.
Mitt Romney : And also make sure that when they get out of college, there's a job.
Mitt Romney : When I was governor of Massachusetts, to get a high school degree, you had to pass an exam.
Mitt Romney : If you graduated in the top quarter of your airlines, we gave you a John and Abigail Adams scholarship, four years tuition free in the college of your choice in Massachusetts, it's a public institution.
Mitt Romney : I want to make sure we keep our Pell grant program growing.
Mitt Romney : We're also going to have our loan program, so that people are able to afford school.
Mitt Romney : But the key thing is to make sure you can get a job when you get out of school.
Mitt Romney : And what's happened over the last four years has been very, very hard for America's young people.
Mitt Romney : I want you to be able to get a job.
Mitt Romney : I know what it takes to get this economy going.
Mitt Romney : With half of college kids graduating this year without a college -- excuse me, without a job.
Mitt Romney : And without a college level job, that's just unacceptable.
Mitt Romney : And likewise you've got more and more debt on your back.
Mitt Romney : So more debt and less jobs.
Mitt Romney : I'm going to change that.
Mitt Romney : I know what it takes to create good jobs again.
Mitt Romney : I know what it takes to make sure that you have the kind of opportunity you deserve.
Mitt Romney : And kids across this country are going to recognize, we're bringing back an economy.
Mitt Romney : It's not going to be like the last four years.
Mitt Romney : The middle-class has been crushed over the last four years, and jobs have been too scarce.
Mitt Romney : I know what it takes to bring them back, and I'm going to do that, and make sure that when you graduate -- when do you graduate?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : 2014
Mitt Romney : 2014
Mitt Romney : When you come out in 2014, I presume I'm going to be president.
Mitt Romney : I'm going to make sure you get a job.
Mitt Romney : Thanks Jeremy.
Mitt Romney : Yeah, you bet.
Candy Crowley : Mr. President?
Barack Obama : Jeremy, first of all, your future is bright.
Barack Obama : And the fact that you're making an investment in higher education is critical.
Barack Obama : Not just to you, but to the entire nation.
Barack Obama : Now, the most important thing we can do is to make sure that we are creating jobs in this country.
Barack Obama : But not just jobs, good paying jobs.
Barack Obama : Ones that can support a family.
Barack Obama : And what I want to do, is build on the five million jobs that we've created over the last 30 months in the private sector alone.
Barack Obama : And there are a bunch of things we can do to make sure your future is bright.
Barack Obama : Number one, I want to build manufacturing jobs in this country again.
Barack Obama : Now when Governor Romney said we should let Detroit go bankrupt.
Barack Obama : I said we're going to bet on American workers and the American auto industry and it's come surging back.
Barack Obama : I want to do that in industries, not just in Detroit, but all across the country and that means we change our tax code so we're giving incentives to companies that are investing here in the United States and creating jobs here.
Barack Obama : It also means we're helping them and small businesses to export all around the world to new markets.
Barack Obama : Number two, we've got to make sure that we have the best education system in the world.
Barack Obama : And the fact that you're going to college is great, but I want everybody to get a great education and we've worked hard to make sure that student loans are available for folks like you, but I also want to make sure that community colleges are offering slots for workers to get retrained for the jobs that are out there right now and the jobs of the future.
Barack Obama : Number three, we've got to control our own energy.
Barack Obama : Now, not only oil and natural gas, which we've been investing in; but also, we've got to make sure we're building the energy source of the future, not just thinking about next year, but ten years from now, 20 years from now.
Barack Obama : That's why we've invested in solar and wind and biofuels, energy efficient cars.
Barack Obama : We've got to reduce our deficit, but we've got to do it in a balanced way.
Barack Obama : Asking the wealthy to pay a little bit more along with cuts so that we can invest in education like yours.
Barack Obama : And let's take the money that we've been spending on war over the last decade to rebuild America, roads, bridges schools.
Barack Obama : We do those things, not only is your future going to be bright but America's future is going to bright as well.
Candy Crowley : Let me ask you for more immediate answer and begin with Mr. Romney just quickly what -- what can you do?
Candy Crowley : We're looking at a situation where 40 percent of the unemployed have been unemployed have been unemployed for six months or more.
Candy Crowley : They don't have the two years that Jeremy has.
Candy Crowley : What about those long term unemployed who need a job right now?
Mitt Romney : Well what you're seeing in this country is 23 million people struggling to find a job.
Mitt Romney : And a lot of them, as you say, Candy, have been out of work for a long, long, long time.
Mitt Romney : The president's policies have been exercised over the last four years and they haven't put Americans back to work.
Mitt Romney : We have fewer people working today than we had when the president took office.
Mitt Romney : If the -- the unemployment rate was 7.8 percent when he took office, it's 7.8 percent now.
Mitt Romney : But if you calculated that unemployment rate, taking back the people who dropped out of the workforce, it would be 10.7 percent.
Mitt Romney : We have not made the progress we need to make to put people back to work.
Mitt Romney : That's why I put out a five-point plan that gets America 12 million new jobs in four years and rising take-home pay.
Mitt Romney : It's going to help Jeremy get a job when he comes out of school.
Mitt Romney : It's going to help people across the country that are unemployed right now.
Mitt Romney : And one thing that the president said, which I want to make sure that we understand, he said that I said we should take Detroit bankrupt.
Mitt Romney : And that's right.
Mitt Romney : My plan was to have the company go through bankruptcy like 7-Eleven did and Macy's and Condell (ph) Airlines and come out stronger.
Mitt Romney : And I know he keeps saying, you want to take Detroit bankrupt.
Mitt Romney : Well, the president took Detroit bankrupt.
Mitt Romney : You took General Motors bankrupt.
Mitt Romney : You took Chrysler bankrupt.
Mitt Romney : So when you say that I wanted to take the auto industry bankrupt, you actually did.
Mitt Romney : And I think it's important to know that that was a process that was necessary to get those companies back on their feet, so they could start hiring more people.
Mitt Romney : That was precisely what I recommended and ultimately what happened.
Candy Crowley : Let me give the president a chance.
Candy Crowley : Go ahead.
Barack Obama : Candy, what Governor Romney said just isn't true.
Barack Obama : He wanted to take them into bankruptcy without providing them any way to stay open.
Barack Obama : And we would have lost a million jobs.
Barack Obama : And that -- don't take my word for it, take the executives at GM and Chrysler, some of whom are Republicans, may even support Governor Romney.
Barack Obama : But they'll tell you his prescription wasn't going to work.
Barack Obama : And Governor Romney's says he's got a five-point plan?
Barack Obama : Governor Romney doesn't have a five-point plan.
Barack Obama : He has a one-point plan.
Barack Obama : And that plan is to make sure that folks at the top play by a different set of rules.
Barack Obama : That's been his philosophy in the private sector, that's been his philosophy as governor, that's been his philosophy as a presidential candidate.
Barack Obama : You can make a lot of money and pay lower tax rates than somebody who makes a lot less.
Barack Obama : You can ship jobs overseas and get tax breaks for it.
Barack Obama : You can invest in a company, bankrupt it, lay off the workers, strip away their pensions, and you still make money.
Barack Obama : That's exactly the philosophy that we've seen in place for the last decade.
Barack Obama : That's what's been squeezing middle class families.
Barack Obama : And we have fought back for four years to get out of that mess.
Barack Obama : The last thing we need to do is to go back to the very same policies that got us there.
Candy Crowley : Mr. President, the next question is going to be for you here.
Candy Crowley : And, Mr. Romney -- Governor Romney -- there'll be plenty of chances here to go on, but I want to...
Mitt Romney : That -- that Detroit -- that Detroit answer...
Candy Crowley : We have all these folks.
Mitt Romney : ... that Detroit answer...
Candy Crowley : I will let you absolutely...
Mitt Romney : ... and the rest of the answer, way off the mark.
Candy Crowley : OK. Will -- will -- you certainly will have lots of time here coming up.
Candy Crowley : Because I want to move you on to something that's sort of connected to cars here, and -- and go over.
Candy Crowley : And we want to get a question from Phillip Tricolla.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Your energy secretary, Steven Chu, has now been on record three times stating it's not policy of his department to help lower gas prices.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Do you agree with Secretary Chu that this is not the job of the Energy Department?
Barack Obama : The most important thing we can do is to make sure we control our own energy.
Barack Obama : So here's what I've done since I've been president.
Barack Obama : We have increased oil production to the highest levels in 16 years.
Barack Obama : Natural gas production is the highest it's been in decades.
Barack Obama : We have seen increases in coal production and coal employment.
Barack Obama : But what I've also said is we can't just produce traditional source of energy.
Barack Obama : We've also got to look to the future.
Barack Obama : That's why we doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars.
Barack Obama : That means that in the middle of the next decade, any car you buy, you're going to end up going twice as far on a gallon of gas.
Barack Obama : That's why we doubled clean -- clean energy production like wind and solar and biofuels.
Barack Obama : And all these things have contributed to us lowering our oil imports to the lowest levels in 16 years.
Barack Obama : Now, I want to build on that.
Barack Obama : And that means, yes, we still continue to open up new areas for drilling.
Barack Obama : We continue to make it a priority for us to go after natural gas.
Barack Obama : We've got potentially 600,000 jobs and 100 years worth of energy right beneath our feet with natural gas.
Barack Obama : And we can do it in an environmentally sound way.
Barack Obama : But we've also got to continue to figure out how we have efficiency energy, because ultimately that's how we're going to reduce demand and that's what's going to keep gas prices lower.
Barack Obama : Now, Governor Romney will say he's got an all-of-the-above plan, but basically his plan is to let the oil companies write the energy policies.
Barack Obama : So he's got the oil and gas part, but he doesn't have the clean energy part.
Barack Obama : And if we are only thinking about tomorrow or the next day and not thinking about 10 years from now, we're not going to control our own economic future.
Barack Obama : Because China, Germany, they're making these investments.
Barack Obama : And I'm not going to cede those jobs of the future to those countries.
Barack Obama : I expect those new energy sources to be built right here in the United States.
Barack Obama : That's going to help Jeremy get a job.
Barack Obama : It's also going to make sure that you're not paying as much for gas.
Candy Crowley : Governor, on the subject of gas prices?
Mitt Romney : Well, let's look at the president's policies, all right, as opposed to the rhetoric, because we've had four years of policies being played out.
Mitt Romney : And the president's right in terms of the additional oil production, but none of it came on federal land.
Mitt Romney : As a matter of fact, oil production is down 14 percent this year on federal land, and gas production was down 9 percent.
Mitt Romney : Why?
Mitt Romney : Because the president cut in half the number of licenses and permits for drilling on federal lands, and in federal waters.
Mitt Romney : So where'd the increase come from?
Mitt Romney : Well a lot of it came from the Bakken Range in North Dakota.
Mitt Romney : What was his participation there?
Mitt Romney : The administration brought a criminal action against the people drilling up there for oil, this massive new resource we have.
Mitt Romney : And what was the cost?
Mitt Romney : 20 or 25 birds were killed and brought out a migratory bird act to go after them on a criminal basis.
Mitt Romney : Look, I want to make sure we use our oil, our coal, our gas, our nuclear, our renewables.
Mitt Romney : I believe very much in our renewable capabilities; ethanol, wind, solar will be an important part of our energy mix.
Mitt Romney : But what we don't need is to have the president keeping us from taking advantage of oil, coal and gas.
Mitt Romney : This has not been Mr. Oil, or Mr. Gas, or Mr. Coal.
Mitt Romney : Talk to the people that are working in those industries.
Mitt Romney : I was in coal country.
Mitt Romney : "People grabbed my arms and said, ""Please save my job."""
Mitt Romney : "The head of the EPA said, ""You can't build a coal plant."
Mitt Romney : "You'll virtually -- it's virtually impossible given our regulations."""
Mitt Romney : When the president ran for office, he said if you build a coal plant, you can go ahead, but you'll go bankrupt.
Mitt Romney : That's not the right course for America.
Mitt Romney : Let's take advantage of the energy resources we have, as well as the energy sources for the future.
Mitt Romney : And if we do that, if we do what I'm planning on doing, which is getting us energy independent, North America energy independence within eight years, you're going to see manufacturing jobs come back.
Mitt Romney : Because our energy is low cost, that are already beginning to come back because of our abundant energy.
Mitt Romney : I'll get America and North America energy independent.
Mitt Romney : I'll do it by more drilling, more permits and licenses.
Mitt Romney : We're going to bring that pipeline in from Canada.
Mitt Romney : How in the world the president said no to that pipeline?
Mitt Romney : I will never know.
Mitt Romney : This is about bringing good jobs back for the middle class of America, and that's what I'm going to do.
Candy Crowley : Mr. President, let me just see if I can move you to the gist of this question, which is, are we looking at the new normal?
Candy Crowley : I can tell you that tomorrow morning, a lot of people in Hempstead will wake up and fill up and they will find that the price of gas is over $4 a gallon.
Candy Crowley : Is it within the purview of the government to bring those prices down, or are we looking at the new normal?
Barack Obama : Candy, there's no doubt that world demand's gone up, but our production is going up, and we're using oil more efficiently.
Barack Obama : And very little of what Governor Romney just said is true.
Barack Obama : We've opened up public lands.
Barack Obama : We're actually drilling more on public lands than in the previous administration and my -- the previous president was an oil man.
Barack Obama : And natural gas isn't just appearing magically.
Barack Obama : We're encouraging it and working with the industry.
Barack Obama : "And when I hear Governor Romney say he's a big coal guy, I mean, keep in mind, when -- Governor, when you were governor of Massachusetts, you stood in front of a coal plant and pointed at it and said, ""This plant kills,"" and took great pride in shutting it down."
Barack Obama : And now suddenly you're a big champion of coal.
Barack Obama : So what I've tried to do is be consistent.
Barack Obama : With respect to something like coal, we made the largest investment in clean coal technology, to make sure that even as we're producing more coal, we're producing it cleaner and smarter.
Barack Obama : Same thing with oil, same thing with natural gas.
Barack Obama : And the proof is our oil imports are down to the lowest levels in 20 years.
Barack Obama : Oil production is up, natural gas production is up, and, most importantly, we're also starting to build cars that are more efficient.
Barack Obama : And that's creating jobs.
Barack Obama : That means those cars can be exported, 'cause that's the demand around the world, and it also means that it'll save money in your pocketbook.
Barack Obama : That's the strategy you need, an all-of-the-above strategy, and that's what we're going to do in the next four years.
Mitt Romney : But that's not what you've done in the last four years.
Mitt Romney : That's the problem.
Mitt Romney : In the last four years, you cut permits and licenses on federal land and federal waters in half.
Barack Obama : Not true, Governor Romney.
Mitt Romney : So how much did you cut (inaudible)?
Barack Obama : Not true.
Mitt Romney : How much did you cut them by, then?
Barack Obama : Governor, we have actually produced more oil --
Mitt Romney : No, no.
Mitt Romney : How much did you cut licenses and permits on federal land and federal waters?
Barack Obama : Governor Romney, here's what we did.
Barack Obama : There were a whole bunch of oil companies.
Barack Obama : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : No, no, I had a question and the question was how much did you cut them by?
Barack Obama : You want me to answer a question --
Mitt Romney : How much did you cut them by?
Barack Obama : I'm happy to answer the question.
Mitt Romney : All right.
Mitt Romney : And it is --
Barack Obama : Here's what happened.
Barack Obama : You had a whole bunch of oil companies who had leases on public lands that they weren't using.
Barack Obama : So what we said was you can't just sit on this for 10, 20, 30 years, decide when you want to drill, when you want to produce, when it's most profitable for you.
Barack Obama : These are public lands.
Barack Obama : So if you want to drill on public lands, you use it or you lose it.
Mitt Romney : OK, (inaudible) --
Barack Obama : And so what we did was take away those leases.
Barack Obama : And we are now reletting them so that we can actually make a profit.
Mitt Romney : And production on private -- on government land --
Barack Obama : Production is up.
Mitt Romney : -- is down.
Barack Obama : No, it isn't.
Mitt Romney : Production on government land of oil is down 14 percent.
Barack Obama : Governor --
Mitt Romney : And production on gas --
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Barack Obama : It's just not true.
Mitt Romney : It's absolutely true.
Mitt Romney : Look, there's no question but the people recognize that we have not produced more (inaudible) on federal lands and in federal waters.
Mitt Romney : And coal, coal production is not up; coal jobs are not up.
Mitt Romney : I was just at a coal facility, where some 1,200 people lost their jobs.
Mitt Romney : The right course for America is to have a true all-of-the-above policy.
Mitt Romney : I don't think anyone really believes that you're a person who's going to be pushing for oil and gas and coal.
Mitt Romney : You'll get your chance in a moment.
Mitt Romney : I'm still speaking.
Barack Obama : Well --
Mitt Romney : And the answer is I don't believe people think that's the case --
Barack Obama : -- (inaudible).
Mitt Romney : That wasn't the question.
Barack Obama : OK.
Mitt Romney : That was a statement.
Mitt Romney : I don't think the American people believe that.
Mitt Romney : I will fight for oil, coal and natural gas.
Mitt Romney : And the proof, the proof of whether a strategy is working or not is what the price is that you're paying at the pump.
Mitt Romney : If you're paying less than you paid a year or two ago, why, then, the strategy is working.
Mitt Romney : But you're paying more.
Mitt Romney : When the president took office, the price of gasoline here in Nassau County was about $1.86 a gallon.
Mitt Romney : Now, it's $4.00 a gallon.
Mitt Romney : The price of electricity is up.
Mitt Romney : If the president's energy policies are working, you're going to see the cost of energy come down.
Mitt Romney : I will fight to create more energy in this country, to get America energy secure.
Mitt Romney : And part of that is bringing in a pipeline of oil from Canada, taking advantage of the oil and coal we have here, drilling offshore in Alaska, drilling offshore in Virginia where the people want it.
Mitt Romney : Those things will get us the energy we need.
Candy Crowley : Mr. President, could you address, because we did finally get to gas prices here, could you address what the governor said, which is if your energy policy was working, the price of gasoline would not be $4 a gallon here.
Candy Crowley : Is that true?
Barack Obama : Well, think about what the governor -- think about what the governor just said.
Barack Obama : He said when I took office, the price of gasoline was $1.80, $1.86.
Barack Obama : Why is that?
Barack Obama : Because the economy was on the verge of collapse, because we were about to go through the worst recession since the Great Depression, as a consequence of some of the same policies that Governor Romney's now promoting.
Barack Obama : So, it's conceivable that Governor Romney could bring down gas prices because with his policies, we might be back in that same mess.
Barack Obama : What I want to do is to create an economy that is strong, and at the same time produce energy.
Barack Obama : And with respect to this pipeline that Governor Romney keeps on talking about, we've -- we've built enough pipeline to wrap around the entire earth once.
Barack Obama : So, I'm all for pipelines.
Barack Obama : I'm all for oil production.
Barack Obama : What I'm not for is us ignoring the other half of the equation.
Barack Obama : "So, for example, on wind energy, when Governor Romney says ""these are imaginary jobs."""
Barack Obama : When you've got thousands of people right now in Iowa, right now in Colorado, who are working, creating wind power with good-paying manufacturing jobs, and the Republican senator in that -- in Iowa is all for it, providing tax breaks (ph) to help this work and Governor Romney says I'm opposed.
Barack Obama : I'd get rid of it.
Barack Obama : That's not an energy strategy for the future.
Barack Obama : And we need to win that future.
Barack Obama : And I intend to win it as President of the United States.
Candy Crowley : I got to -- I got to move you on --
Mitt Romney : He gets the first --
Candy Crowley : -- and the next question --
Mitt Romney : He actually got --
Candy Crowley : -- for you --
Mitt Romney : He actually got the first question.
Mitt Romney : So I get the last question -- last answer --
Candy Crowley : (Inaudible) in the follow up, it doesn't quite work like that.
Candy Crowley : But I'm going to give you a chance here.
Candy Crowley : I promise you, I'm going to.
Candy Crowley : And the next question is for you.
Candy Crowley : So if you want to, you know, continue on -- but I don't want to leave all --
Mitt Romney : Candy, Candy --
Candy Crowley : -- sitting here --
Mitt Romney : Candy, I don't have a policy of stopping wind jobs in Iowa and that -- they're not phantom jobs.
Mitt Romney : They're real jobs.
Candy Crowley : OK.
Mitt Romney : I appreciate wind jobs in Iowa and across our country.
Mitt Romney : I appreciate the jobs in coal and oil and gas.
Mitt Romney : I'm going to make sure --
Candy Crowley : OK.
Mitt Romney : -- we're taking advantage of our energy resources.
Mitt Romney : We'll bring back manufacturing to America.
Mitt Romney : We're going to get through a very aggressive energy policy, 31/2 million more jobs in this country.
Mitt Romney : It's critical to our future.
Barack Obama : Candy, it's not going to --
Candy Crowley : We're going to move you along --
Barack Obama : Used to being interrupted.
Candy Crowley : We're going to move you both along to taxes over here and all these folks that have been waiting.
Candy Crowley : Governor, this question is for you.
Candy Crowley : It comes from Mary Follano -- Follano, sorry.
Mitt Romney : Hi, Mary.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Governor Romney, you have stated that if you're elected president, you would plan to reduce the tax rates for all the tax brackets and that you would work with the Congress to eliminate some deductions in order to make up for the loss in revenue.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Concerning the -- these various deductions, the mortgage deductions, the charitable deductions, the child tax credit and also the -- oh, what's that other credit?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : I forgot.
Barack Obama : You're doing great.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Oh, I remember.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : The education credits, which are important to me, because I have children in college.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : What would be your position on those things, which are important to the middle class?
Mitt Romney : Thank you very much.
Mitt Romney : And let me tell you, you're absolutely right about part of that, which is I want to bring the rates down, I want to simplify the tax code, and I want to get middle- income taxpayers to have lower taxes.
Mitt Romney : And the reason I want middle-income taxpayers to have lower taxes is because middle-income taxpayers have been buried over the past four years.
Mitt Romney : You've seen, as middle-income people in this country, incomes go down $4,300 a family, even as gasoline prices have gone up $2,000.
Mitt Romney : Health insurance premiums, up $2,500.
Mitt Romney : Food prices up.
Mitt Romney : Utility prices up.
Mitt Romney : The middle-income families in America have been crushed over the last four years.
Mitt Romney : So I want to get some relief to middle-income families.
Mitt Romney : That's part -- that's part one.
Mitt Romney : Now, how about deductions?
Mitt Romney : 'Cause I'm going to bring rates down across the board for everybody, but I'm going to limit deductions and exemptions and credits, particularly for people at the high end, because I am not going to have people at the high end pay less than they're paying now.
Mitt Romney : The top 5 percent of taxpayers will continue to pay 60 percent of the income tax the nation collects.
Mitt Romney : So that'll stay the same.
Mitt Romney : Middle-income people are going to get a tax break.
Mitt Romney : And so, in terms of bringing down deductions, one way of doing that would be say everybody gets -- I'll pick a number -- $25,000 of deductions and credits, and you can decide which ones to use.
Mitt Romney : Your home mortgage interest deduction, charity, child tax credit, and so forth, you can use those as part of filling that bucket, if you will, of deductions.
Mitt Romney : But your rate comes down and the burden also comes down on you for one more reason, and that is every middle-income taxpayer no longer will pay any tax on interest, dividends or capital gains.
Mitt Romney : No tax on your savings.
Mitt Romney : That makes life a lot easier.
Mitt Romney : If you're getting interest from a bank, if you're getting a statement from a mutual fund or any other kind of investment you have, you don't have to worry about filing taxes on that, because there'll be no taxes for anybody making $200,000.00 per year and less, on your interest, dividends and capital gains.
Mitt Romney : Why am I lowering taxes on the middle-class?
Mitt Romney : Because under the last four years, they've been buried.
Mitt Romney : And I want to help people in the middle-class.
Mitt Romney : And I will not -- I will not under any circumstances, reduce the share that's being paid by the highest income taxpayers.
Mitt Romney : And I will not, under any circumstances increase taxes on the middle-class.
Mitt Romney : The president's spending, the president's borrowing will cost this nation to have to raise taxes on the American people.
Mitt Romney : Not just at the high end.
Mitt Romney : A recent study has shown the people in the middle-class will see $4,000.00 per year in higher taxes as a result of the spending and borrowing of this administration.
Mitt Romney : I will not let that happen.
Mitt Romney : I want to get us on track to a balanced budget, and I'm going to reduce the tax burden on middle income families.
Mitt Romney : And what's that going to do?
Mitt Romney : It's going to help those families, and it's going to create incentives to start growing jobs again in this country.
Candy Crowley : Thanks, Governor.
Barack Obama : My philosophy on taxes has been simple.
Barack Obama : And that is, I want to give middle-class families and folks who are striving to get into the middle-class some relief.
Barack Obama : Because they have been hit hard over the last decade.
Barack Obama : Over the last 15, over the last 20 years.
Barack Obama : So four years ago I stood on a stage just like this one.
Barack Obama : Actually it was a town hall, and I said I would cut taxes for middle- class families, and that's what I've done, by $3,600.00.
Barack Obama : I said I would cut taxes for small businesses, who are the drivers and engines of growth.
Barack Obama : And we've cut them 18 times.
Barack Obama : And I want to continue those tax cuts for middle-class families, and for small business.
Barack Obama : But what I've also said is, if we're serious about reducing the deficit, if this is genuinely a moral obligation to the next generation, then in addition to some tough spending cuts, we've also got to make sure that the wealthy do a little bit more.
Barack Obama : So what I've said is, your first $250,000.00 worth of income, no change.
Barack Obama : And that means 98 percent of American families, 97 percent of small businesses, they will not see a tax increase.
Barack Obama : I'm ready to sign that bill right now.
Barack Obama : The only reason it's not happening is because Governor Romney's allies in Congress have held the 98 percent hostage because they want tax breaks for the top 2 percent.
Barack Obama : But what I've also says is for above $250,000, we can go back to the tax rates we had when Bill Clinton was president.
Barack Obama : We created 23 million new jobs.
Barack Obama : That's part of what took us from deficits to surplus.
Barack Obama : It will be good for our economy and it will be good for job creation.
Barack Obama : Now, Governor Romney has a different philosophy.
Barack Obama : He was on 60 Minutes just two weeks ago and he was asked: Is it fair for somebody like you, making $20 million a year, to pay a lower tax rate than a nurse or a bus driver, somebody making $50,000 year?
Barack Obama : "And he said, ""Yes, I think that's fair."""
Barack Obama : "Not only that, he said, ""I think that's what grows the economy."""
Barack Obama : Well, I fundamentally disagree with that.
Barack Obama : I think what grows the economy is when you get that tax credit that we put in place for your kids going to college.
Barack Obama : I think that grows the economy.
Barack Obama : I think what grows the economy is when we make sure small businesses are getting a tax credit for hiring veterans who fought for our country.
Barack Obama : That grows our economy.
Barack Obama : So we just have a different theory.
Barack Obama : "And when Governor Romney stands here, after a year of campaigning, when during a Republican primary he stood on stage and said ""I'm going to give tax cuts"" -- he didn't say tax rate cuts, he said ""tax cuts to everybody,"" including the top 1 percent, you should believe him because that's been his history."
Barack Obama : And that's exactly the kind of top-down economics that is not going to work if we want a strong middle class and an economy that's striving for everybody.
Candy Crowley : Governor Romney, I'm sure you've got a reply there.
Mitt Romney : You're absolutely right.
Mitt Romney : You heard what I said about my tax plan.
Mitt Romney : The top 5 percent will continue to pay 60 percent, as they do today.
Mitt Romney : I'm not looking to cut taxes for wealthy people.
Mitt Romney : I am looking to cut taxes for middle-income people.
Mitt Romney : And why do I want to bring rates down, and at the same time lower exemptions and deductions, particularly for people at the high end?
Mitt Romney : Because if you bring rates down, it makes it easier for small business to keep more of their capital and hire people.
Mitt Romney : And for me, this is about jobs.
Mitt Romney : I want to get America's economy going again.
Mitt Romney : Fifty-four percent of America's workers work in businesses that are taxed as individuals.
Mitt Romney : So when you bring those rates down, those small businesses are able to keep more money and hire more people.
Mitt Romney : For me, I look at what's happened in the last four years and say this has been a disappointment.
Mitt Romney : We can do better than this.
Mitt Romney : We don't have to settle for, how many months, 43 months with unemployment above 8 percent, 23 million Americans struggling to find a good job right now.
Mitt Romney : There are 3.5 million more women living in poverty today than when the president took office.
Mitt Romney : We don't have to live like this.
Mitt Romney : We can get this economy going again.
Mitt Romney : My five-point plan does it.
Mitt Romney : Energy independence for North America in five years.
Mitt Romney : Opening up more trade, particularly in Latin America.
Mitt Romney : Cracking down on China when they cheat.
Mitt Romney : Getting us to a balanced budget.
Mitt Romney : Fixing our training programs for our workers.
Mitt Romney : And finally, championing small business.
Mitt Romney : I want to make small businesses grow and thrive.
Mitt Romney : I know how to make that happen.
Mitt Romney : I spent my life in the private sector.
Mitt Romney : I know why jobs come and why they go.
Mitt Romney : And they're going now because of the policies of this administration.
Candy Crowley : Governor, let me ask the president something about what you just said.
Candy Crowley : The governor says that he is not going to allow the top 5 percent, believe is what he said, to have a tax cut, that it will all even out, that what he wants to do is give that tax cut to the middle class.
Candy Crowley : Settled?
Barack Obama : No, it's not settled.
Barack Obama : Look, the cost of lowering rates for everybody across the board, 20 percent.
Barack Obama : Along with what he also wants to do in terms of eliminating the estate tax, along what he wants to do in terms of corporates, changes in the tax code, it costs about $5 trillion.
Barack Obama : Governor Romney then also wants to spend $2 trillion on additional military programs even though the military's not asking for them.
Barack Obama : That's $7 trillion.
Barack Obama : He also wants to continue the Bush tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans.
Barack Obama : That's another trillion dollars -- that's $8 trillion.
Barack Obama : Now, what he says is he's going to make sure that this doesn't add to the deficit and he's going to cut middleclass taxes.
Barack Obama : But when he's asked, how are you going to do it, which deductions, which loopholes are you going to close?
Barack Obama : He can't tell you.
Barack Obama : The -- the fact that he only has to pay 14 percent on his taxes when a lot of you are paying much higher.
Barack Obama : He's already taken that off the board, capital gains are going to continue to be at a low rate so we -- we're not going to get money that way.
Barack Obama : We haven't heard from the governor any specifics beyond Big Bird and eliminating funding for Planned Parenthood in terms of how he pays for that.
Barack Obama : Now, Governor Romney was a very successful investor.
Barack Obama : If somebody came to you, Governor, with a plan that said, here, I want to spend $7 or $8 trillion, and then we're going to pay for it, but we can't tell you until maybe after the election how we're going to do it, you wouldn't take such a sketchy deal and neither should you, the American people, because the math doesn't add up.
Barack Obama : And -- and what's at stake here is one of two things, either Candy -- this blows up the deficit because keep in mind, this is just to pay for the additional spending that he's talking about, $7 trillion - $8 trillion before we even get to the deficit we already have.
Barack Obama : Or, alternatively, it's got to be paid for, not only by closing deductions for wealthy individuals, that -- that will pay for about 4 percent reduction in tax rates.
Barack Obama : You're going to be paying for it.
Barack Obama : You're going to lose some deductions, and you can't buy the sales pitch.
Barack Obama : Nobody who's looked at it that's serious, actually believes it adds up.
Candy Crowley : Mr. President, let me get -- let me get the governor in on this.
Candy Crowley : And Governor, let's -- before we get into a...
Mitt Romney : I -- I...
Candy Crowley : ...vast array of who says -- what study says what, if it shouldn't add up.
Candy Crowley : If somehow when you get in there, there isn't enough tax revenue coming in.
Candy Crowley : If somehow the numbers don't add up, would you be willing to look again at a 20 percent...
Mitt Romney : Well of course they add up.
Mitt Romney : I -- I was -- I was someone who ran businesses for 25 years, and balanced the budget.
Mitt Romney : I ran the Olympics and balanced the budget.
Mitt Romney : I ran the -- the state of Massachusetts as a governor, to the extent any governor does, and balanced the budget all four years.
Mitt Romney : When we're talking about math that doesn't add up, how about $4 trillion of deficits over the last four years, $5 trillion?
Mitt Romney : That's math that doesn't add up.
Mitt Romney : We have -- we have a president talking about someone's plan in a way that's completely foreign to what my real plan is.
Mitt Romney : And then we have his own record, which is we have four consecutive years where he said when he was running for office, he would cut the deficit in half.
Mitt Romney : Instead he's doubled it.
Mitt Romney : We've gone from $10 trillion of national debt, to $16 trillion of national debt.
Mitt Romney : If the president were reelected, we'd go to almost $20 trillion of national debt.
Mitt Romney : This puts us on a road to Greece.
Mitt Romney : I know what it takes to balance budgets.
Mitt Romney : I've done it my entire life.
Mitt Romney : "So for instance when he says, ""Yours is a $5 trillion cut."""
Mitt Romney : Well, no it's not.
Mitt Romney : Because I'm offsetting some of the reductions with holding down some of the deductions.
Mitt Romney : And...
Candy Crowley : Governor, I've gotta -- gotta -- actually, I need to have you both (inaudible).
Candy Crowley : (CROSSTALK)
Candy Crowley : I understand the stakes here.
Candy Crowley : I understand both of you.
Candy Crowley : But I -- I will get run out of town if I don't...
Candy Crowley : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : And I just described -- I just described to you, Mr. President -- I just described to you precisely how I'd do it which is with a single number that people can put -- and they can put they're -- they're deductions and credits...
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Candy Crowley : Mr. President, we're keeping track, I promise you.
Candy Crowley : And Mr. President, the next question is for you, so stay standing.
Barack Obama : Great.
Barack Obama : Looking forward to it.
Barack Obama : And it's Katherine Fenton, who has a question for you.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : In what new ways to you intend to rectify the inequalities in the workplace, specifically regarding females making only 72 percent of what their male counterparts earn?
Barack Obama : Well, Katherine, that's a great question.
Barack Obama : And, you know, I was raised by a single mom who had to put herself through school while looking after two kids.
Barack Obama : And she worked hard every day and made a lot of sacrifices to make sure we got everything we needed.
Barack Obama : My grandmother, she started off as a secretary in a bank.
Barack Obama : She never got a college education, even though she was smart as a whip.
Barack Obama : And she worked her way up to become a vice president of a local bank, but she hit the glass ceiling.
Barack Obama : She trained people who would end up becoming her bosses during the course of her career.
Barack Obama : She didn't complain.
Barack Obama : That's not what you did in that generation.
Barack Obama : And this is one of the reasons why one of the first -- the first bill I signed was something called the Lily Ledbetter bill.
Barack Obama : And it's named after this amazing woman who had been doing the same job as a man for years, found out that she was getting paid less, and the Supreme Court said that she couldn't bring suit because she should have found about it earlier, whereas she had no way of finding out about it.
Barack Obama : So we fixed that.
Barack Obama : And that's an example of the kind of advocacy that we need, because women are increasingly the breadwinners in the family.
Barack Obama : This is not just a women's issue, this is a family issue, this is a middle-class issue, and that's why we've got to fight for it.
Barack Obama : It also means that we've got to make sure that young people like yourself are able to afford a college education.
Barack Obama : Earlier, Governor Romney talked about he wants to make Pell Grants and other education accessible for young people.
Barack Obama : Well, the truth of the matter is, is that that's exactly what we've done.
Barack Obama : We've expanded Pell Grants for millions of people, including millions of young women, all across the country.
Barack Obama : We did it by taking $60 billion that was going to banks and lenders as middlemen for the student loan program, and we said, let's just cut out the middleman.
Barack Obama : Let's give the money directly to students.
Barack Obama : And as a consequence, we've seen millions of young people be able to afford college, and that's going to make sure that young women are going to be able to compete in that marketplace.
Barack Obama : But we've got to enforce the laws, which is what we are doing, and we've also got to make sure that in every walk of life we do not tolerate discrimination.
Barack Obama : That's been one of the hallmarks of my administration.
Barack Obama : I'm going to continue to push on this issue for the next four years.
Candy Crowley : Governor Romney, pay equity for women?
Mitt Romney : Thank you.
Mitt Romney : And important topic, and one which I learned a great deal about, particularly as I was serving as governor of my state, because I had the chance to pull together a cabinet and all the applicants seemed to be men.
Mitt Romney : "And I -- and I went to my staff, and I said, ""How come all the people for these jobs are -- are all men."""
Mitt Romney : "They said, ""Well, these are the people that have the qualifications."""
Mitt Romney : "And I said, ""Well, gosh, can't we -- can't we find some -- some women that are also qualified?"""
Mitt Romney : And -- and so we -- we took a concerted effort to go out and find women who had backgrounds that could be qualified to become members of our cabinet.
Mitt Romney : "I went to a number of women's groups and said, ""Can you help us find folks,"" and they brought us whole binders full of women."
Mitt Romney : I was proud of the fact that after I staffed my Cabinet and my senior staff, that the University of New York in Albany did a survey of all 50 states, and concluded that mine had more women in senior leadership positions than any other state in America.
Mitt Romney : Now one of the reasons I was able to get so many good women to be part of that team was because of our recruiting effort.
Mitt Romney : But number two, because I recognized that if you're going to have women in the workforce that sometimes you need to be more flexible.
Mitt Romney : My chief of staff, for instance, had two kids that were still in school.
Mitt Romney : She said, I can't be here until 7 or 8 o'clock at night.
Mitt Romney : I need to be able to get home at 5 o'clock so I can be there for making dinner for my kids and being with them when they get home from school.
Mitt Romney : So we said fine.
Mitt Romney : Let's have a flexible schedule so you can have hours that work for you.
Mitt Romney : We're going to have to have employers in the new economy, in the economy I'm going to bring to play, that are going to be so anxious to get good workers they're going to be anxious to hire women.
Mitt Romney : In the -- in the last women have lost 580,000 jobs.
Mitt Romney : That's the net of what's happened in the last four years.
Mitt Romney : We're still down 580,000 jobs.
Mitt Romney : I mentioned 31/2 million women, more now in poverty than four years ago.
Mitt Romney : What we can do to help young women and women of all ages is to have a strong economy, so strong that employers that are looking to find good employees and bringing them into their workforce and adapting to a flexible work schedule that gives women opportunities that they would otherwise not be able to afford.
Mitt Romney : This is what I have done.
Mitt Romney : It's what I look forward to doing and I know what it takes to make an economy work, and I know what a working economy looks like.
Mitt Romney : And an economy with 7.8 percent unemployment is not a real strong economy.
Mitt Romney : An economy that has 23 million people looking for work is not a strong economy.
Mitt Romney : An economy with 50 percent of kids graduating from college that can't finds a job, or a college level job, that's not what we have to have.
Candy Crowley : Governor?
Mitt Romney : I'm going to help women in America get good work by getting a stronger economy and by supporting women in the workforce.
Candy Crowley : Mr. President why don't you get in on this quickly, please?
Barack Obama : Katherine, I just want to point out that when Governor Romney's campaign was asked about the Lilly Ledbetter bill, whether he supported it?
Barack Obama : "He said, ""I'll get back to you."""
Barack Obama : And that's not the kind of advocacy that women need in any economy.
Barack Obama : Now, there are some other issues that have a bearing on how women succeed in the workplace.
Barack Obama : For example, their healthcare.
Barack Obama : You know a major difference in this campaign is that Governor Romney feels comfortable having politicians in Washington decide the health care choices that women are making.
Barack Obama : I think that's a mistake.
Barack Obama : In my health care bill, I said insurance companies need to provide contraceptive coverage to everybody who is insured.
Barack Obama : Because this is not just a -- a health issue, it's an economic issue for women.
Barack Obama : It makes a difference.
Barack Obama : This is money out of that family's pocket.
Barack Obama : Governor Romney not only opposed it, he suggested that in fact employers should be able to make the decision as to whether or not a woman gets contraception through her insurance coverage.
Barack Obama : That's not the kind of advocacy that women need.
Barack Obama : When Governor Romney says that we should eliminate funding for Planned Parenthood, there are millions of women all across the country, who rely on Planned Parenthood for, not just contraceptive care, they rely on it for mammograms, for cervical cancer screenings.
Barack Obama : That's a pocketbook issue for women and families all across the country.
Barack Obama : And it makes a difference in terms of how well and effectively women are able to work.
Barack Obama : When we talk about child care, and the credits that we're providing.
Barack Obama : That makes a difference in whether they can go out there and -- and earn a living for their family.
Barack Obama : These are not just women's issues.
Barack Obama : These are family issues.
Barack Obama : These are economic issues.
Barack Obama : And one of the things that makes us grow as an economy is when everybody participates and women are getting the same fair deal as men are.
Candy Crowley : Mr. President...
Barack Obama : And I've got two daughters and I want to make sure that they have the same opportunities that anybody's sons have.
Barack Obama : That's part of what I'm fighting for as president of the United States.
Candy Crowley : I want to move us along here to Susan Katz, who has a question.
Candy Crowley : And, Governor, it's for you.
Candy Crowley : QUESTION: Governor Romney, I am an undecided voter, because I'm disappointed with the lack of progress I've seen in the last four years.
Candy Crowley : However, I do attribute much of America's economic and international problems to the failings and missteps of the Bush administration.
Candy Crowley : Since both you and President Bush are Republicans, I fear a return to the policies of those years should you win this election.
Candy Crowley : What is the biggest difference between you and George W. Bush, and how do you differentiate yourself from George W. Bush?
Mitt Romney : Thank you.
Mitt Romney : And I appreciate that question.
Mitt Romney : I just want to make sure that, I think I was supposed to get that last answer, but I want to point out that that I don't believe...
Barack Obama : I don't think so, Candy.
Mitt Romney : ...
Mitt Romney : I don't believe...
Barack Obama : I want to make sure our timekeepers are working here.
Mitt Romney : The time -- the time...
Candy Crowley : OK.
Candy Crowley : The timekeepers are all working.
Candy Crowley : And let me tell you that the last part, it's for the two of you to talk to one another, and it isn't quite as (inaudible) you think.
Candy Crowley : But go ahead and use this two minutes any way you'd like to, the question is on the floor.
Mitt Romney : I'd just note that I don't believe that bureaucrats in Washington should tell someone whether they can use contraceptives or not.
Mitt Romney : And I don't believe employers should tell someone whether they could have contraceptive care of not.
Mitt Romney : Every woman in America should have access to contraceptives.
Mitt Romney : And -- and the -- and the president's statement of my policy is completely and totally wrong.
Barack Obama : Governor...
Mitt Romney : Let me come back and -- and answer your question.
Mitt Romney : President Bush and I are -- are different people and these are different times and that's why my five point plan is so different than what he would have done.
Mitt Romney : I mean for instance, we can now, by virtue of new technology actually get all the energy we need in North America without having to go to the -- the Arabs or the Venezuelans or anyone else.
Mitt Romney : That wasn't true in his time, that's why my policy starts with a very robust policy to get all that energy in North America -- become energy secure.
Mitt Romney : Number two, trade -- I'll crack down on China, President Bush didn't.
Mitt Romney : I'm also going to dramatically expand trade in Latin America.
Mitt Romney : It's been growing about 12 percent per year over a long period of time.
Mitt Romney : I want to add more free trade agreements so we'll have more trade.
Mitt Romney : Number three, I'm going to get us to a balanced budget.
Mitt Romney : President Bush didn't.
Mitt Romney : President Obama was right, he said that that was outrageous to have deficits as high as half a trillion dollars under the Bush years.
Mitt Romney : He was right, but then he put in place deficits twice that size for every one of his four years.
Mitt Romney : And his forecast for the next four years is more deficits, almost that large.
Mitt Romney : So that's the next area I'm different than President Bush.
Mitt Romney : And then let's take the last one, championing small business.
Mitt Romney : Our party has been focused too long.
Mitt Romney : I came through small business.
Mitt Romney : I understand how hard it is to start a small business.
Mitt Romney : That's why everything I'll do is designed to help small businesses grow and add jobs.
Mitt Romney : I want to keep their taxes down on small business.
Mitt Romney : I want regulators to see their job as encouraging small enterprise, not crushing it.
Mitt Romney : And the thing I find the most troubling about Obama Care, well it's a long list, but one of the things I find most troubling is that when you go out and talk to small businesses and ask them what they think about it, they tell you it keeps them from hiring more people.
Mitt Romney : My priority is jobs.
Mitt Romney : I know how to make that happen.
Mitt Romney : And President Bush has a very different path for a very different time.
Mitt Romney : My path is designed in getting small businesses to grow and hire people.
Candy Crowley : Thanks, Governor.
Candy Crowley : Mr. President?
Barack Obama : Well, first of all, I think it's important to tell you that we did come in during some tough times.
Barack Obama : We were losing 800,000 jobs a month when I started.
Barack Obama : But we had been digging our way out of policies that were misplaced and focused on the top doing very well and middle class folks not doing well.
Barack Obama : Now, we've seen 30 consecutive -- 31 consecutive months of job growth; 5.2 million new jobs created.
Barack Obama : And the plans that I talked about will create even more.
Barack Obama : But when Governor Romney says that he has a very different economic plan, the centerpiece of his economic plan are tax cuts.
Barack Obama : That's what took us from surplus to deficit.
Barack Obama : When he talks about getting tough on China, keep in mind that Governor Romney invested in companies that were pioneers of outsourcing to China, and is currently investing in countries -- in companies that are building surveillance equipment for China to spy on its own folks.
Barack Obama : That's -- Governor, you're the last person who's going to get tough on China.
Barack Obama : And what we've done when it comes to trade is not only sign three trade deals to open up new markets, but we've also set up a task force for trade that goes after anybody who is taking advantage of American workers or businesses and not creating a level playing field.
Barack Obama : We've brought twice as many cases against unfair trading practices than the previous administration and we've won every single one that's been decided.
Barack Obama : When I said that we had to make sure that China was not flooding our domestic market with cheap tires, Governor Romney said I was being protectionist; that it wouldn't be helpful to American workers.
Barack Obama : Well, in fact we saved 1,000 jobs.
Barack Obama : And that's the kind of tough trade actions that are required.
Barack Obama : But the last point I want to make is this.
Barack Obama : You know, there are some things where Governor Romney is different from George Bush.
Barack Obama : George Bush didn't propose turning Medicare into a voucher.
Barack Obama : George Bush embraced comprehensive immigration reform.
Barack Obama : He didn't call for self-deportation.
Barack Obama : George Bush never suggested that we eliminate funding for Planned Parenthood, so there are differences between Governor Romney and George Bush, but they're not on economic policy.
Barack Obama : In some ways, he's gone to a more extreme place when it comes to social policy.
Barack Obama : And I think that's a mistake.
Barack Obama : That's not how we're going to move our economy forward.
Candy Crowley : I want to move you both along to the next question, because it's in the same wheelhouse, so you will be able to respond.
Candy Crowley : But the president does get this question.
Candy Crowley : I want to call on Michael Jones.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Mr. President, I voted for you in 2008.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : What have you done or accomplished to earn my vote in 2012?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : I'm not that optimistic as I was in 2012.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Most things I need for everyday living are very expensive.
Barack Obama : Well, we've gone through a tough four years.
Barack Obama : There's no doubt about it.
Barack Obama : But four years ago, I told the American people and I told you I would cut taxes for middle class families.
Barack Obama : And I did.
Barack Obama : I told you I'd cut taxes for small businesses, and I have.
Barack Obama : I said that I'd end the war in Iraq, and I did.
Barack Obama : I said we'd refocus attention on those who actually attacked us on 9/11, and we have gone after Al Qaeda's leadership like never before and Osama bin Laden is dead.
Barack Obama : I said that we would put in place health care reform to make sure that insurance companies can't jerk you around and if you don't have health insurance, that you'd have a chance to get affordable insurance, and I have.
Barack Obama : I committed that I would rein in the excesses of Wall Street, and we passed the toughest Wall Street reforms since the 1930s.
Barack Obama : We've created five million jobs, and gone from 800 jobs a month being lost, and we are making progress.
Barack Obama : We saved an auto industry that was on the brink of collapse.
Barack Obama : Now, does that mean you're not struggling?
Barack Obama : Absolutely not.
Barack Obama : A lot of us are.
Barack Obama : And that's why the plan that I've put forward for manufacturing and education, and reducing our deficit in a sensible way, using the savings from ending wars, to rebuild America and putting people back to work.
Barack Obama : Making sure that we are controlling our own energy, but not only the energy of today, but also the energy of the future.
Barack Obama : All of those things will make a difference, so the point is the commitments I've made, I've kept.
Barack Obama : And those that I haven't been able to keep, it's not for lack of trying and we're going to get it done in a second term.
Barack Obama : But, you should pay attention to this campaign, because Governor Romney has made some commitments as well.
Barack Obama : And I suspect he'll keep those too.
Barack Obama : "You know when members of the Republican Congress say, ""We're going to sign a no tax pledge, so that we don't ask a dime for millionaires and billionaires to reduce our deficit so we can still invest in education, and helping kids go to college."
Barack Obama : "He said, ""Me too."""
Barack Obama : "When they said, ""We're going to cut Planned Parenthood funding."""
Barack Obama : "He said, ""Me too."""
Barack Obama : "When he said, ""We're going to repeal Obamacare."
Barack Obama : "First thing I'm going to do,"" despite the fact that it's the same health care plan that he passed in Massachusetts and is working well."
Barack Obama : "He said, ""Me too."""
Barack Obama : That is not the kind of leadership that you need, but you should expect that those are promises he's going to keep.
Barack Obama : (CROSSTALK)
Candy Crowley : Mr. President, let me let...
Candy Crowley : (CROSSTALK)
Barack Obama : ...the choice in this election is going to be whose promises are going to be more likely to help you in your life?
Barack Obama : Make sure your kids can go to college.
Barack Obama : Make sure that you are getting a good paying job, making sure that Medicare and Social Security... (CROSSTALK)
Candy Crowley : Mr. President.
Candy Crowley : Thank you.
Candy Crowley : (CROSSTALK)
Barack Obama : ...will be there for you.
Candy Crowley : Thank you.
Candy Crowley : Governor?
Mitt Romney : I think you know better.
Mitt Romney : I think you know that these last four years haven't been so good as the president just described and that you don't feel like your confident that the next four years are going to be much better either.
Mitt Romney : I can tell you that if you were to elect President Obama, you know what you're going to get.
Mitt Romney : You're going to get a repeat of the last four years.
Mitt Romney : We just can't afford four more years like the last four years.
Mitt Romney : He said that by now we'd have unemployment at 5.4 percent.
Mitt Romney : The difference between where it is and 5.4 percent is 9 million Americans without work.
Mitt Romney : I wasn't the one that said 5.4 percent.
Mitt Romney : This was the president's plan.
Mitt Romney : Didn't get there.
Mitt Romney : He said he would have by now put forward a plan to reform Medicare and Social Security, because he pointed out they're on the road to bankruptcy.
Mitt Romney : He would reform them.
Mitt Romney : He'd get that done.
Mitt Romney : He hasn't even made a proposal on either one.
Mitt Romney : He said in his first year he'd put out an immigration plan that would deal with our immigration challenges.
Mitt Romney : Didn't even file it.
Mitt Romney : This is a president who has not been able to do what he said he'd do.
Mitt Romney : He said that he'd cut in half the deficit.
Mitt Romney : He hasn't done that either.
Mitt Romney : In fact, he doubled it.
Mitt Romney : He said that by now middle-income families would have a reduction in their health insurance premiums by $2,500 a year.
Mitt Romney : It's gone up by $2,500 a year.
Mitt Romney : And if Obamacare is passed, or implemented -- it's already been passed -- if it's implemented fully, it'll be another $2,500 on top.
Mitt Romney : The middle class is getting crushed under the policies of a president who has not understood what it takes to get the economy working again.
Mitt Romney : "He keeps saying, ""Look, I've created 5 million jobs."""
Mitt Romney : That's after losing 5 million jobs.
Mitt Romney : The entire record is such that the unemployment has not been reduced in this country.
Mitt Romney : The unemployment, the number of people who are still looking for work, is still 23 million Americans.
Mitt Romney : There are more people in poverty, one out of six people in poverty.
Mitt Romney : How about food stamps?
Mitt Romney : When he took office, 32 million people were on food stamps.
Mitt Romney : Today, 47 million people are on food stamps.
Mitt Romney : How about the growth of the economy?
Mitt Romney : It's growing more slowly this year than last year, and more slowly last year than the year before.
Mitt Romney : The president wants to do well.
Mitt Romney : I understand.
Mitt Romney : But the policies he's put in place from Obamacare to Dodd-Frank to his tax policies to his regulatory policies, these policies combined have not let this economy take off and grow like it could have.
Mitt Romney : "You might say, ""Well, you got an example of one that worked better?"""
Mitt Romney : Yeah, in the Reagan recession where unemployment hit 10.8 percent, between that period -- the end of that recession and the equivalent of time to today, Ronald Reagan's recovery created twice as many jobs as this president's recovery.
Mitt Romney : Five million jobs doesn't even keep up with our population growth.
Mitt Romney : And the only reason the unemployment rate seems a little lower today is because of all the people that have dropped out of the workforce.
Mitt Romney : The president has tried, but his policies haven't worked.
Mitt Romney : He's great as a -- as a -- as a speaker and describing his plans and his vision.
Mitt Romney : That's wonderful, except we have a record to look at.
Mitt Romney : And that record shows he just hasn't been able to cut the deficit, to put in place reforms for Medicare and Social Security to preserve them, to get us the rising incomes we need.
Mitt Romney : Median income is down $4,300 a family and 23 million Americans out of work.
Mitt Romney : That's what this election is about.
Mitt Romney : It's about who can get the middle class in this country a bright and prosperous future and assure our kids the kind of hope and optimism they deserve.
Candy Crowley : Governor, I want to move you along.
Candy Crowley : Don't -- don't go away, and we'll have plenty of time to respond.
Candy Crowley : We are quite aware of the clock for both of you.
Candy Crowley : But I want to bring in a different subject here.
Candy Crowley : Mr. President, I'll be right back with you.
Candy Crowley : Lorraine Osorio has a question for you about a topic we have not...
Barack Obama : This is for Governor Romney?
Candy Crowley : It's for Governor Romney, and we'll be right with you, Mr. President.
Candy Crowley : Thanks.
Mitt Romney : Is it Loraina?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Lorraine.
Mitt Romney : Lorraine?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Yes, Lorraine.
Mitt Romney : Lorraine.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : How you doing?
Mitt Romney : Good, thanks.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Mr. Romney, what do you plan on doing with immigrants without their green cards that are currently living here as productive members of society?
Mitt Romney : Thank you.
Mitt Romney : Lorraine?
Mitt Romney : Did I get that right?
Mitt Romney : Good.
Mitt Romney : Thank you for your question.
Mitt Romney : And let me step back and tell you what I would like to do with our immigration policy broadly and include an answer to your question.
Mitt Romney : But first of all, this is a nation of immigrants.
Mitt Romney : We welcome people coming to this country as immigrants.
Mitt Romney : My dad was born in Mexico of American parents; Ann's dad was born in Wales and is a first-generation American.
Mitt Romney : We welcome legal immigrants into this country.
Mitt Romney : I want our legal system to work better.
Mitt Romney : I want it to be streamlined.
Mitt Romney : I want it to be clearer.
Mitt Romney : I don't think you have to -- shouldn't have to hire a lawyer to figure out how to get into this country legally.
Mitt Romney : I also think that we should give visas to people -- green cards, rather, to people who graduate with skills that we need.
Mitt Romney : People around the world with accredited degrees in science and math get a green card stapled to their diploma, come to the U.S. of A.
Mitt Romney : We should make sure our legal system works.
Mitt Romney : Number two, we're going to have to stop illegal immigration.
Mitt Romney : There are 4 million people who are waiting in line to get here legally.
Mitt Romney : Those who've come here illegally take their place.
Mitt Romney : So I will not grant amnesty to those who have come here illegally.
Mitt Romney : What I will do is I'll put in place an employment verification system and make sure that employers that hire people who have come here illegally are sanctioned for doing so.
Mitt Romney : I won't put in place magnets for people coming here illegally.
Mitt Romney : So for instance, I would not give driver's licenses to those that have come here illegally as the president would.
Mitt Romney : The kids of those that came here illegally, those kids, I think, should have a pathway to become a permanent resident of the United States and military service, for instance, is one way they would have that kind of pathway to become a permanent resident.
Mitt Romney : Now when the president ran for office, he said that he'd put in place, in his first year, a piece of legislation -- he'd file a bill in his first year that would reform our -- our immigration system, protect legal immigration, stop illegal immigration.
Mitt Romney : He didn't do it.
Mitt Romney : He had a Democrat House, a Democrat Senate, super majority in both Houses.
Mitt Romney : Why did he fail to even promote legislation that would have provided an answer for those that want to come legally and for those that are here illegally today?
Mitt Romney : What's a question I think the -- the president will have a chance to answer right now.
Barack Obama : Good, I look forward to it.
Barack Obama : Was -- Lorranna -- Lorraine -- we are a nation of immigrants.
Barack Obama : I mean we're just a few miles away from Ellis Island.
Barack Obama : We all understand what this country has become because talent from all around the world wants to come here.
Barack Obama : People are willing to take risks.
Barack Obama : People who want to build on their dreams and make sure their kids have an even bigger dreams than they have.
Barack Obama : But we're also a nation of laws.
Barack Obama : So what I've said is we need to fix a broken immigration system and I've done everything that I can on my own and sought cooperation from Congress to make sure that we fix the system.
Barack Obama : The first thing we did was to streamline the legal immigration system, to reduce the backlog, make it easier, simpler and cheaper for people who are waiting in line, obeying the law to make sure that they can come here and contribute to our country and that's good for our economic growth.
Barack Obama : They'll start new businesses.
Barack Obama : They'll make things happen to create jobs here in the United States.
Barack Obama : Number two, we do have to deal with our border so we put more border patrol on the -- any time in history and the flow of undocumented works across the border is actually lower than it's been in 40 years.
Barack Obama : What I've also said is if we're going to go after folks who are here illegally, we should do it smartly and go after folks who are criminals, gang bangers, people who are hurting the community, not after students, not after folks who are here just because they're trying to figure out how to feed their families.
Barack Obama : And that's what we've done.
Barack Obama : And what I've also said is for young people who come here, brought here often times by their parents.
Barack Obama : Had gone to school here, pledged allegiance to the flag.
Barack Obama : Think of this as their country.
Barack Obama : Understand themselves as Americans in every way except having papers.
Barack Obama : And we should make sure that we give them a pathway to citizenship.
Barack Obama : And that's what I've done administratively.
Barack Obama : "Now, Governor Romney just said, you know he wants to help those young people too, but during the Republican primary, he said, ""I will veto the DREAM Act"", that would allow these young people to have access."""
Barack Obama : "His main strategy during the Republican primary was to say, ""We're going to encourage self-deportation."""
Barack Obama : Making life so miserable on folks that they'll leave.
Barack Obama : He called the Arizona law a model for the nation.
Barack Obama : Part of the Arizona law said that law enforcement officers could stop folks because they suspected maybe they looked like they might be undocumented workers and check their papers.
Barack Obama : You know what?
Barack Obama : If my daughter or yours looks to somebody like they're not a citizen, I don't want -- I don't want to empower somebody like that.
Barack Obama : So, we can fix this system in a comprehensive way.
Barack Obama : "And when Governor Romney says, the challenge is, ""Well Obama didn't try."""
Barack Obama : That's not true.
Barack Obama : I have sat down with Democrats and Republicans at the beginning of my term.
Barack Obama : And I said, let's fix this system.
Barack Obama : Including Senators previously who had supported it on the Republican side.
Barack Obama : But it's very hard for Republican's in Congress to support comprehensive immigration reform, if their standard bearer has said that, this is not something I'm interested in supporting.
Candy Crowley : Let me get the governor in here, Mr. President.
Candy Crowley : Let's speak to, if you could...
Mitt Romney : Yes.
Candy Crowley : ...the idea of self-deportation?
Mitt Romney : No, let -- let -- let me go back and speak to the points that the president made and -- and -- and let's get them correct.
Mitt Romney : I did not say that the Arizona law was a model for the nation in that aspect.
Mitt Romney : I said that the E-Verify portion of the Arizona law, which is -- which is the portion of the law which says that employers could be able to determine whether someone is here illegally or not illegally, that that was a model for the nation.
Mitt Romney : That's number one.
Mitt Romney : Number two, I asked the president a question I think Hispanics and immigrants all over the nation have asked.
Mitt Romney : He was asked this on Univision the other day.
Mitt Romney : Why, when you said you'd filed legislation in your first year didn't you do it?
Mitt Romney : And he didn't answer.
Mitt Romney : He -- he doesn't answer that question.
Mitt Romney : He said the standard bearer wasn't for it.
Mitt Romney : I'm glad you thought I was a standard bearer four years ago, but I wasn't.
Mitt Romney : Four years ago you said in your first year you would file legislation.
Mitt Romney : In his first year, I was just getting -- licking my wounds from having been beaten by John McCain, all right.
Mitt Romney : I was not the standard bearer.
Mitt Romney : My -- my view is that this president should have honored his promise to do as he said.
Mitt Romney : Now, let me mention one other thing, and that is self-deportation says let people make their own choice.
Mitt Romney : What I was saying is, we're not going to round up 12 million people, undocumented illegals, and take them out of the nation.
Mitt Romney : Instead let people make their own choice.
Mitt Romney : And if they -- if they find that -- that they can't get the benefits here that they want and they can't -- and they can't find the job they want, then they'll make a decision to go a place where -- where they have better opportunities.
Mitt Romney : But I'm not in favor of rounding up people and -- and -- and taking them out of this country.
Mitt Romney : I am in favor, as the president has said, and I agree with him, which is that if people have committed crimes we got to get them out of this country.
Mitt Romney : Let me mention something else the president said.
Mitt Romney : It was a moment ago and I didn't get a chance to, when he was describing Chinese investments and so forth.
Barack Obama : Candy?
Barack Obama : Hold on a second.
Barack Obama : The...
Mitt Romney : Mr. President, I'm still speaking.
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : Mr. President, let me finish.
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : I've gotta continue.
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Candy Crowley : Governor Romney, you can make it short.
Candy Crowley : See all these people?
Candy Crowley : They've been waiting for you.
Candy Crowley : (inaudible) make it short (inaudible).
Mitt Romney : Just going to make a point.
Mitt Romney : Any investments I have over the last eight years have been managed by a blind trust.
Mitt Romney : And I understand they do include investments outside the United States, including in -- in Chinese companies.
Mitt Romney : Mr. President, have you looked at your pension?
Mitt Romney : Have you looked at your pension?
Barack Obama : I've got to say...
Mitt Romney : Mr. President, have you looked at your pension?
Barack Obama : You know, I -- I don't look at my pension.
Barack Obama : It's not as big as yours so it doesn't take as long.
Mitt Romney : Well, let me give you some advice.
Barack Obama : I don't check it that often.
Mitt Romney : Let me give you some advice.
Mitt Romney : Look at your pension.
Mitt Romney : You also have investments in Chinese companies.
Mitt Romney : You also have investments outside the United States.
Mitt Romney : You also have investments through a Cayman's trust.
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Candy Crowley : We're way off topic here, Governor Romney.
Candy Crowley : (CROSSTALK)
Barack Obama : I thought we were talking about immigration.
Barack Obama : (CROSSTALK)
Barack Obama : I do want to make sure that...
Candy Crowley : If I could have you sit down, Governor Romney.
Candy Crowley : Thank you.
Barack Obama : I do want to make sure that -- I do want to make sure that we just understand something.
Barack Obama : Governor Romney says he wasn't referring to Arizona as a model for the nation.
Barack Obama : His top adviser on immigration is the guy who designed the Arizona law, the entirety of it; not E-Verify, the whole thing.
Barack Obama : That's his policy.
Barack Obama : And it's a bad policy.
Barack Obama : And it won't help us grow.
Barack Obama : Look, when we think about immigration, we have to understand there are folks all around the world who still see America as the land of promise.
Barack Obama : And they provide us energy and they provide us innovation and they start companies like Intel and Google.
Barack Obama : And we want to encourage that.
Barack Obama : Now, we've got to make sure that we do it in a smart way and a comprehensive way, and we make the legal system better.
Barack Obama : But when we make this into a divisive political issue, and when we don't have bipartisan support -- I can deliver, Governor, a whole bunch of Democrats to get comprehensive immigration reform done, and we can't...
Mitt Romney : I'll get it done.
Mitt Romney : I'll get it done.
Mitt Romney : First year...
Barack Obama : ... we can't -- we have not seen Republicans serious about this issue at all.
Barack Obama : And it's time for them to get serious on it.
Candy Crowley : Mr. President, let me move you on here please.
Candy Crowley : Mr. President, (inaudible).
Barack Obama : This used to be a bipartisan issue.
Barack Obama : (CROSSTALK)
Candy Crowley : Don't go away, though -- right.
Candy Crowley : Don't go away because I -- I want you to talk to Kerry Ladka who wants to switch the topic for us.
Barack Obama : OK.
Barack Obama : Hi, Kerry.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Good evening, Mr. President.
Barack Obama : I'm sorry.
Barack Obama : What's your name?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : It's Kerry, Kerry Ladka.
Barack Obama : Great to see you.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : This question actually comes from a brain trust of my friends at Global Telecom Supply (ph) in Minneola yesterday.
Barack Obama : Ah.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : We were sitting around, talking about Libya, and we were reading and became aware of reports that the State Department refused extra security for our embassy in Benghazi, Libya, prior to the attacks that killed four Americans.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Who was it that denied enhanced security and why?
Barack Obama : Well, let me first of all talk about our diplomats, because they serve all around the world and do an incredible job in a very dangerous situation.
Barack Obama : And these aren't just representatives of the United States, they are my representatives.
Barack Obama : I send them there, oftentimes into harm's way.
Barack Obama : I know these folks and I know their families.
Barack Obama : So nobody is more concerned about their safety and security than I am.
Barack Obama : So as soon as we found out that the Benghazi consulate was being overrun, I was on the phone with my national security team and I gave them three instructions.
Barack Obama : Number one, beef up our security and procedures, not just in Libya, but at every embassy and consulate in the region.
Barack Obama : Number two, investigate exactly what happened, regardless of where the facts lead us, to make sure folks are held accountable and it doesn't happen again.
Barack Obama : And number three, we are going to find out who did this and we're going to hunt them down, because one of the things that I've said throughout my presidency is when folks mess with Americans, we go after them.
Barack Obama : Now Governor Romney had a very different response.
Barack Obama : While we were still dealing with our diplomats being threatened, Governor Romney put out a press release, trying to make political points, and that's not how a commander in chief operates.
Barack Obama : You don't turn national security into a political issue.
Barack Obama : Certainly not right when it's happening.
Barack Obama : And people -- not everybody agrees with some of the decisions I've made.
Barack Obama : But when it comes to our national security, I mean what I say.
Barack Obama : I said I'd end the war in Libya -- in -- in Iraq, and I did.
Barack Obama : I said that we'd go after al-Qaeda and bin Laden, we have.
Barack Obama : I said we'd transition out of Afghanistan, and start making sure that Afghans are responsible for their own security, that's what I'm doing.
Barack Obama : And when it comes to this issue, when I say that we are going to find out exactly what happened, everybody will be held accountable.
Barack Obama : And I am ultimately responsible for what's taking place there because these are my folks, and I'm the one who has to greet those coffins when they come home.
Barack Obama : You know that I mean what I say.
Candy Crowley : Mr. President, I'm going to move us along.
Candy Crowley : Governor?
Mitt Romney : Thank you Kerry for your question, it's an important one.
Mitt Romney : And -- and I -- I think the president just said correctly that the buck does stop at his desk and -- and he takes responsibility for -- for that -- for the failure in providing those security resources, and -- and those terrible things may well happen from time to time.
Mitt Romney : I -- I'm -- I feel very deeply sympathetic for the families of those who lost loved ones.
Mitt Romney : And today there's a memorial service for one of those that was lost in this tragedy.
Mitt Romney : We -- we think of their families and care for them deeply.
Mitt Romney : There were other issues associated with this -- with this tragedy.
Mitt Romney : There were many days that passed before we knew whether this was a spontaneous demonstration, or actually whether it was a terrorist attack.
Mitt Romney : And there was no demonstration involved.
Mitt Romney : It was a terrorist attack and it took a long time for that to be told to the American people.
Mitt Romney : Whether there was some misleading, or instead whether we just didn't know what happened, you have to ask yourself why didn't we know five days later when the ambassador to the United Nations went on TV to say that this was a demonstration.
Mitt Romney : How could we have not known?
Mitt Romney : But I find more troubling than this, that on -- on the day following the assassination of the United States ambassador, the first time that's happened since 1979, when -- when we have four Americans killed there, when apparently we didn't know what happened, that the president, the day after that happened, flies to Las Vegas for a political fund-raiser, then the next day to Colorado for another event, other political event.
Mitt Romney : I think these -- these actions taken by a president and a leader have symbolic significance and perhaps even material significance in that you'd hope that during that time we could call in the people who were actually eyewitnesses.
Mitt Romney : We've read their accounts now about what happened.
Mitt Romney : It was very clear this was not a demonstration.
Mitt Romney : This was an attack by terrorists.
Mitt Romney : And this calls into question the president's whole policy in the Middle East.
Mitt Romney : Look what's happening in Syria, in Egypt, now in Libya.
Mitt Romney : Consider the distance between ourselves and -- and Israel, the president said that -- that he was going to put daylight between us and Israel.
Mitt Romney : We have Iran four years closer to a nuclear bomb.
Mitt Romney : Syria -- Syria's not just a tragedy of 30,000 civilians being killed by a military, but also a strategic -- strategically significant player for America.
Mitt Romney : The president's policies throughout the Middle East began with an apology tour and -- and -- and pursue a strategy of leading from behind, and this strategy is unraveling before our very eyes.
Candy Crowley : Because we're -- we're closing in, I want to still get a lot of people in.
Candy Crowley : I want to ask you something, Mr. President, and then have the governor just quickly.
Candy Crowley : Your secretary of state, as I'm sure you know, has said that she takes full responsibility for the attack on the diplomatic mission in Benghazi.
Candy Crowley : Does the buck stop with your secretary of state as far as what went on here?
Barack Obama : Secretary Clinton has done an extraordinary job.
Barack Obama : But she works for me.
Barack Obama : I'm the president and I'm always responsible, and that's why nobody's more interested in finding out exactly what happened than I do.
Barack Obama : The day after the attack, governor, I stood in the Rose Garden and I told the American people in the world that we are going to find out exactly what happened.
Barack Obama : That this was an act of terror and I also said that we're going to hunt down those who committed this crime.
Barack Obama : And then a few days later, I was there greeting the caskets coming into Andrews Air Force Base and grieving with the families.
Barack Obama : And the suggestion that anybody in my team, whether the Secretary of State, our U.N.
Barack Obama : Ambassador, anybody on my team would play politics or mislead when we've lost four of our own, governor, is offensive.
Barack Obama : That's not what we do.
Barack Obama : That's not what I do as president, that's not what I do as Commander in Chief.
Candy Crowley : Governor, if you want to...
Mitt Romney : Yes, I -- I...
Candy Crowley : ... quickly to this please.
Mitt Romney : I -- I think interesting the president just said something which -- which is that on the day after the attack he went into the Rose Garden and said that this was an act of terror.
Barack Obama : That's what I said.
Mitt Romney : You said in the Rose Garden the day after the attack, it was an act of terror.
Mitt Romney : It was not a spontaneous demonstration, is that what you're saying?
Barack Obama : Please proceed governor.
Mitt Romney : I want to make sure we get that for the record because it took the president 14 days before he called the attack in Benghazi an act of terror.
Barack Obama : Get the transcript.
Candy Crowley : It -- it -- it -- he did in fact, sir.
Candy Crowley : So let me -- let me call it an act of terror...
Barack Obama : Can you say that a little louder, Candy?
Candy Crowley : He -- he did call it an act of terror.
Candy Crowley : It did as well take -- it did as well take two weeks or so for the whole idea there being a riot out there about this tape to come out.
Candy Crowley : You are correct about that.
Mitt Romney : This -- the administration -- the administration indicated this was a reaction to a video and was a spontaneous reaction.
Candy Crowley : It did.
Mitt Romney : It took them a long time to say this was a terrorist act by a terrorist group.
Mitt Romney : And to suggest -- am I incorrect in that regard, on Sunday, the -- your secretary --
Barack Obama : Candy?
Mitt Romney : Excuse me.
Mitt Romney : The ambassador of the United Nations went on the Sunday television shows and spoke about how --
Barack Obama : Candy, I'm --
Mitt Romney : -- this was a spontaneous --
Candy Crowley : Mr. President, let me --
Barack Obama : I'm happy to have a longer conversation --
Candy Crowley : I know you --
Barack Obama : -- about foreign policy.
Candy Crowley : Absolutely.
Candy Crowley : But I want to -- I want to move you on and also --
Barack Obama : OK.
Barack Obama : I'm happy to do that, too.
Candy Crowley : -- the transcripts and --
Barack Obama : I just want to make sure that --
Candy Crowley : -- figure out what we --
Barack Obama : -- all of these wonderful folks are going to have a chance to get some of their questions answered.
Candy Crowley : Because what I -- what I want to do, Mr. President, stand there a second, because I want to introduce you to Nina Gonzalez, who brought up a question that we hear a lot, both over the Internet and from this crowd.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : President Obama, during the Democratic National Convention in 2008, you stated you wanted to keep AK-47s out of the hands of criminals.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : What has your administration done or planned to do to limit the availability of assault weapons?
Barack Obama : We're a nation that believes in the Second Amendment, and I believe in the Second Amendment.
Barack Obama : We've got a long tradition of hunting and sportsmen and people who want to make sure they can protect themselves.
Barack Obama : But there have been too many instances during the course of my presidency, where I've had to comfort families who have lost somebody.
Barack Obama : Most recently out in Aurora.
Barack Obama : You know, just a couple of weeks ago, actually, probably about a month, I saw a mother, who I had met at the bedside of her son, who had been shot in that theater.
Barack Obama : And her son had been shot through the head.
Barack Obama : And we spent some time, and we said a prayer and, remarkably, about two months later, this young man and his mom showed up, and he looked unbelievable, good as new.
Barack Obama : But there were a lot of families who didn't have that good fortune and whose sons or daughters or husbands didn't survive.
Barack Obama : So my belief is that, (A), we have to enforce the laws we've already got, make sure that we're keeping guns out of the hands of criminals, those who are mentally ill. We've done a much better job in terms of background checks, but we've got more to do when it comes to enforcement.
Barack Obama : But I also share your belief that weapons that were designed for soldiers in war theaters don't belong on our streets.
Barack Obama : And so what I'm trying to do is to get a broader conversation about how do we reduce the violence generally.
Barack Obama : Part of it is seeing if we can get an assault weapons ban reintroduced.
Barack Obama : But part of it is also looking at other sources of the violence.
Barack Obama : Because frankly, in my home town of Chicago, there's an awful lot of violence and they're not using AK-47s.
Barack Obama : They're using cheap hand guns.
Barack Obama : And so what can we do to intervene, to make sure that young people have opportunity; that our schools are working; that if there's violence on the streets, that working with faith groups and law enforcement, we can catch it before it gets out of control.
Barack Obama : And so what I want is a -- is a comprehensive strategy.
Barack Obama : Part of it is seeing if we can get automatic weapons that kill folks in amazing numbers out of the hands of criminals and the mentally ill.
Barack Obama : But part of it is also going deeper and seeing if we can get into these communities and making sure we catch violent impulses before they occur.
Candy Crowley : Governor Romney, the question is about assault weapons, AK-47s.
Mitt Romney : Yeah, I'm not in favor of new pieces of legislation on -- on guns and taking guns away or making certain guns illegal.
Mitt Romney : We, of course, don't want to have automatic weapons, and that's already illegal in this country to have automatic weapons.
Mitt Romney : What I believe is we have to do, as the president mentioned towards the end of his remarks there, which is to make enormous efforts to enforce the gun laws that we have, and to change the culture of violence that we have.
Mitt Romney : And you ask how -- how are we going to do that?
Mitt Romney : And there are a number of things.
Mitt Romney : He mentioned good schools.
Mitt Romney : I totally agree.
Mitt Romney : We were able to drive our schools to be number one in the nation in my state.
Mitt Romney : And I believe if we do a better job in education, we'll -- we'll give people the -- the hope and opportunity they deserve and perhaps less violence from that.
Mitt Romney : But let me mention another thing.
Mitt Romney : And that is parents.
Mitt Romney : We need moms and dads, helping to raise kids.
Mitt Romney : Wherever possible the -- the benefit of having two parents in the home, and that's not always possible.
Mitt Romney : A lot of great single moms, single dads.
Mitt Romney : But gosh to tell our kids that before they have babies, they ought to think about getting married to someone, that's a great idea.
Mitt Romney : Because if there's a two parent family, the prospect of living in poverty goes down dramatically.
Mitt Romney : The opportunities that the child will -- will be able to achieve increase dramatically.
Mitt Romney : So we can make changes in the way our culture works to help bring people away from violence and give them opportunity, and bring them in the American system.
Mitt Romney : The -- the greatest failure we've had with regards to -- to gun violence in some respects is what -- what is known as Fast and Furious.
Mitt Romney : Which was a program under this administration, and how it worked exactly I think we don't know precisely, where thousands of automatic, and AK-47 type weapons were -- were given to people that ultimately gave them to -- to drug lords.
Mitt Romney : They used those weapons against -- against their own citizens and killed Americans with them.
Mitt Romney : And this was a -- this was a program of the government.
Mitt Romney : For what purpose it was put in place, I can't imagine.
Mitt Romney : But it's one of the great tragedies related to violence in our society which has occurred during this administration.
Mitt Romney : Which I think the American people would like to understand fully, it's been investigated to a degree, but -- but the administration has carried out executive privilege to prevent all of the information from coming out.
Mitt Romney : I'd like to understand who it was that did this, what the idea was behind it, why it led to the violence, thousands of guns going to Mexican drug lords.
Mitt Romney : OBAMA: Candy?
Candy Crowley : Governor, Governor, if I could, the question was about these assault weapons that once were once banned and are no longer banned.
Candy Crowley : I know that you signed an assault weapons ban when you were in Massachusetts, obviously, with this question, you no longer do support that.
Candy Crowley : Why is that, given the kind of violence that we see sometimes with these mass killings?
Candy Crowley : Why is it that you have changed your mind?
Mitt Romney : Well, Candy, actually, in my state, the pro-gun folks and the anti-gun folks came together and put together a piece of legislation.
Mitt Romney : And it's referred to as an assault weapon ban, but it had, at the signing of the bill, both the pro-gun and the anti-gun people came together, because it provided opportunities for both that both wanted.
Mitt Romney : There were hunting opportunities, for instance, that haven't previously been available and so forth, so it was a mutually agreed- upon piece of legislation.
Mitt Romney : That's what we need more of, Candy.
Mitt Romney : What we have right now in Washington is a place that's gridlocked.
Candy Crowley : So I could -- if you could get people to agree to it, you would be for it?
Mitt Romney : We have --
Barack Obama : Candy?
Mitt Romney : -- we haven't had the leadership in Washington to work on a bipartisan basis.
Mitt Romney : I was able to do that in my state and bring these two together.
Candy Crowley : Quickly, Mr. President.
Barack Obama : The -- first of all, I think Governor Romney was for an assault weapons ban before he was against it.
Barack Obama : And he said that the reason he changed his mind was, in part, because he was seeking the endorsement of the National Rifle Association.
Barack Obama : So that's on the record.
Barack Obama : But I think that one area we agree on is the important of parents and the importance of schools, because I do believe that if our young people have opportunity, then they are less likely to engage in these kinds of violent acts.
Barack Obama : We're not going to eliminate everybody who is mentally disturbed and we have got to make sure they don't get weapons.
Barack Obama : But we can make a difference in terms ensuring that every young person in America, regardless of where they come from, what they look like, have a chance to succeed.
Barack Obama : And, Candy, we haven't had a chance to talk about education much, but I think it is very important to understand that the reforms we've put in place, working with 46 governors around the country, are seeing schools that are some of the ones that are the toughest for kids starting to succeed.
Barack Obama : We're starting to see gains in math and science.
Barack Obama : When it comes to community colleges, we are setting up programs, including with Nassau Community College, to retrain workers, including young people who may have dropped out of school but now are getting another chance, training them for the jobs that exist right now.
Barack Obama : And in fact, employers are looking for skilled workers.
Barack Obama : And so we're matching them up.
Barack Obama : Giving them access to higher education.
Barack Obama : As I said, we have made sure that millions of young people are able to get an education that they weren't able to get before.
Barack Obama : Now...
Candy Crowley : Mr. President, I have to -- I have to move you along here.
Candy Crowley : You said you wanted to...
Candy Crowley : (CROSSTALK)
Candy Crowley : We need to do it here.
Barack Obama : But -- but it'll -- it'll -- it'll be...
Barack Obama : (CROSSTALK)
Barack Obama : ... just one second.
Candy Crowley : One...
Barack Obama : Because -- because this is important.
Barack Obama : This is part of the choice in this election.
Barack Obama : When Governor Romney was asked whether teachers, hiring more teachers was important to growing our economy, Governor Romney said that doesn't grow our economy.
Barack Obama : When -- when he was asked would class size...
Barack Obama : (CROSSTALK)
Candy Crowley : The question, Mr. President, was guns here, so I need to move us along.
Barack Obama : I understand.
Candy Crowley : You know, the question was guns.
Candy Crowley : So let me -- let me bring in another...
Barack Obama : But this will make a difference in terms of whether or not we can move this economy forward for these young people...
Candy Crowley : I understand.
Barack Obama : ... and reduce our violence.
Candy Crowley : OK.
Candy Crowley : Thank you so much.
Candy Crowley : I want to ask Carol Goldberg to stand up, because she gets to a question that both these men have been passionate about.
Candy Crowley : It's for Governor Romney.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : The outsourcing of American jobs overseas has taken a toll on our economy.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : What plans do you have to put back and keep jobs here in the United States?
Mitt Romney : Boy, great question and important question, because you're absolutely right.
Mitt Romney : The place where we've seen manufacturing go has been China.
Mitt Romney : China is now the largest manufacturer in the world.
Mitt Romney : It used to be the United States of America.
Mitt Romney : A lot of good people have lost jobs.
Mitt Romney : A half a million manufacturing jobs have been lost in the last four years.
Mitt Romney : That's total over the last four years.
Mitt Romney : One of the reasons for that is that people think it's more attractive in some cases to go offshore than to stay here.
Mitt Romney : We have made it less attractive for enterprises to stay here than to go offshore from time to time.
Mitt Romney : What I will do as president is make sure it's more attractive to come to America again.
Mitt Romney : This is the way we're going to create jobs in this country.
Mitt Romney : It's not by trickle-down government, saying we're going to take more money from people and hire more government workers, raise more taxes, put in place more regulations.
Mitt Romney : Trickle-down government has never worked here, has never worked anywhere.
Mitt Romney : I want to make America the most attractive place in the world for entrepreneurs, for small business, for big business, to invest and grow in America.
Mitt Romney : Now, we're going to have to make sure that as we trade with other nations that they play by the rules.
Mitt Romney : And China hasn't.
Mitt Romney : One of the reasons -- or one of the ways they don't play by the rules is artificially holding down the value of their currency.
Mitt Romney : Because if they put their currency down low, that means their prices on their goods are low.
Mitt Romney : And that makes them advantageous in the marketplace.
Mitt Romney : We lose sales.
Mitt Romney : And manufacturers here in the U.S. making the same products can't compete.
Mitt Romney : China has been a currency manipulator for years and years and years.
Mitt Romney : And the president has a regular opportunity to label them as a currency manipulator, but refuses to do so.
Mitt Romney : On day one, I will label China a currency manipulator, which will allow me as president to be able to put in place, if necessary, tariffs where I believe that they are taking unfair advantage of our manufacturers.
Mitt Romney : So we're going to make sure that people we trade with around the world play by the rules.
Mitt Romney : But let me -- let me not just stop there.
Mitt Romney : Don't forget, what's key to bringing back jobs here is not just finding someone else to punish, and I'm going to be strict with people who we trade with to make sure they -- they follow the law and play by the rules, but it's also to make America the most attractive place in the world for businesses of all kinds.
Mitt Romney : That's why I want to down the tax rates on small employers, big employers, so they want to be here.
Mitt Romney : Canada's tax rate on companies is now 15 percent.
Mitt Romney : Ours is 35 percent.
Mitt Romney : So if you're starting a business, where would you rather start it?
Mitt Romney : We have to be competitive if we're going to create more jobs here.
Mitt Romney : Regulations have quadrupled.
Mitt Romney : The rate of regulations quadrupled under this president.
Mitt Romney : I talk to small businesses across the country.
Mitt Romney : "They say, ""We feel like we're under attack from our own government."""
Mitt Romney : I want to make sure that regulators see their job as encouraging small business, not crushing it.
Mitt Romney : And there's no question but that Obamacare has been an extraordinary deterrent to enterprises of all kinds hiring people.
Mitt Romney : My priority is making sure that we get more people hired.
Mitt Romney : If we have more people hired, if we get back manufacturing jobs, if we get back all kinds of jobs into this country, then you're going to see rising incomes again.
Mitt Romney : The reason incomes are down is because unemployment is so high.
Mitt Romney : I know what it takes to get this to happen, and my plan will do that, and one part of it is to make sure that we keep China playing by the rules.
Candy Crowley : Mr. President, two minutes here, because we are then going to go to our last question.
Barack Obama : OK. We need to create jobs here.
Barack Obama : And both Governor Romney and I agree actually that we should lower our corporate tax rate.
Barack Obama : It's too high.
Barack Obama : But there's a difference in terms of how we would do it.
Barack Obama : I want to close loopholes that allow companies to deduct expenses when they move to China; that allow them to profit offshore and not have to get taxed, so they have tax advantages offshore.
Barack Obama : All those changes in our tax code would make a difference.
Barack Obama : Now, Governor Romney actually wants to expand those tax breaks.
Barack Obama : One of his big ideas when it comes to corporate tax reform would be to say, if you invest overseas, you make profits overseas, you don't have to pay U.S. taxes.
Barack Obama : But, of course, if you're a small business or a mom-and-pop business or a big business starting up here, you've got to pay even the reduced rate that Governor Romney's talking about.
Barack Obama : And it's estimated that that will create 800,000 new jobs.
Barack Obama : The problem is they'll be in china.
Barack Obama : Or India.
Barack Obama : Or Germany.
Barack Obama : That's not the way we're going to create jobs here.
Barack Obama : The way we're going to create jobs here is not just to change our tax code, but also to double our exports.
Barack Obama : And we are on pace to double our exports, one of the commitments I made when I was president.
Barack Obama : That's creating tens of thousands of jobs all across the country.
Barack Obama : That's why we've kept on pushing trade deals, but trade deals that make sure that American workers and American businesses are getting a good deal.
Barack Obama : Now, Governor Romney talked about China, as I already indicated.
Barack Obama : In the private sector, Governor Romney's company invested in what were called pioneers of outsourcing.
Barack Obama : That's not my phrase.
Barack Obama : That's what reporters called it.
Barack Obama : And as far as currency manipulation, the currency has actually gone up 11 percent since I've been president because we have pushed them hard.
Barack Obama : And we've put unprecedented trade pressure on China.
Barack Obama : That's why exports have significantly increased under my presidency.
Barack Obama : That's going to help to create jobs here.
Candy Crowley : Mr. President, we have a really short time for a quick discussion here.
Candy Crowley : iPad, the Macs, the iPhones, they are all manufactured in China.
Candy Crowley : One of the major reasons is labor is so much cheaper here.
Candy Crowley : How do you convince a great American company to bring that manufacturing back here?
Mitt Romney : The answer is very straightforward.
Mitt Romney : We can compete with anyone in the world as long as the playing field is level.
Mitt Romney : China's been cheating over the years.
Mitt Romney : One by holding down the value of their currency.
Mitt Romney : Number two, by stealing our intellectual property; our designs, our patents, our technology.
Mitt Romney : There's even an Apple store in China that's a counterfeit Apple store, selling counterfeit goods.
Mitt Romney : They hack into our computers.
Mitt Romney : We will have to have people play on a fair basis, that's number one.
Mitt Romney : Number two, we have to make America the most attractive place for entrepreneurs, for people who want to expand their business.
Mitt Romney : That's what brings jobs in.
Mitt Romney : The president's characterization of my tax plan...
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : ...is completely...is completely...
Mitt Romney : (CROSSTALK)
Mitt Romney : ...is completely false.
Mitt Romney : Let me tell you...
Candy Crowley : Let me to go the president here because we really are running out of time.
Candy Crowley : And the question is can we ever get -- we can't get wages like that.
Candy Crowley : It can't be sustained.
Barack Obama : Candy, there are some jobs that are not going to come back.
Barack Obama : Because they are low wage, low skill jobs.
Barack Obama : I want high wage, high skill jobs.
Barack Obama : That's why we have to emphasize manufacturing.
Barack Obama : That's why we have to invest in advanced manufacturing.
Barack Obama : That's why we've got to make sure that we've got the best science and research in the world.
Barack Obama : And when we talk about deficits, if we're adding to our deficit for tax cuts for folks who don't need them, and we're cutting investments in research and science that will create the next Apple, create the next new innovation that will sell products around the world, we will lose that race.
Barack Obama : If we're not training engineers to make sure that they are equipped here in this country.
Barack Obama : Then companies won't come here.
Barack Obama : Those investments are what's going to help to make sure that we continue to lead this world economy, not just next year, but 10 years from now, 50 years from now, 100 years from now.
Candy Crowley : Thanks Mr. President.
Candy Crowley : (CROSSTALK)
Candy Crowley : Governor Romney?
Mitt Romney : Government does not create jobs.
Mitt Romney : Government does not create jobs.
Candy Crowley : Governor Romney, I want to introduce you to Barry Green, because he's going to have the last question to you first?
Mitt Romney : Barry?
Mitt Romney : Where is Barry?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Hi, Governor.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : I think this is a tough question.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : To each of you.
AUDIENCE MEMBER : What do you believe is the biggest misperception that the American people have about you as a man and a candidate?
AUDIENCE MEMBER : Using specific examples, can you take this opportunity to debunk that misperception and set us straight?
Mitt Romney : Thank you, and that's an opportunity for me, and I appreciate it.
Mitt Romney : In the nature of a campaign, it seems that some campaigns are focused on attacking a person rather than prescribing their own future and the things they'd like to do.
Mitt Romney : In the course of that, I think the president's campaign has tried to characterize me as -- as someone who's very different than who I am.
Mitt Romney : I care about 100 percent of the American people.
Mitt Romney : I want 100 percent of the American people to have a bright and prosperous future.
Mitt Romney : I care about our kids.
Mitt Romney : I understand what it takes to make a bright and prosperous future for America again.
Mitt Romney : I spent my life in the private sector, not in government.
Mitt Romney : I'm a guy who wants to help with the experience I have, the American people.
Mitt Romney : My -- my passion probably flows from the fact that I believe in God.
Mitt Romney : And I believe we're all children of the same God.
Mitt Romney : I believe we have a responsibility to care for one another.
Mitt Romney : I -- I served as a missionary for my church.
Mitt Romney : I served as a pastor in my congregation for about 10 years.
Mitt Romney : I've sat across the table from people who were out of work and worked with them to try and find new work or to help them through tough times.
Mitt Romney : I went to the Olympics when they were in trouble to try and get them on track.
Mitt Romney : And as governor of my state, I was able to get 100 percent of my people insured, all my kids, about 98 percent of the adults.
Mitt Romney : I was able also to get our schools ranked number one in the nation, so 100 percent of our kids would have a bright opportunity for a future.
Mitt Romney : I understand that I can get this country on track again.
Mitt Romney : We don't have to settle for what we're going through.
Mitt Romney : We don't have to settle for gasoline at four bucks.
Mitt Romney : We don't have to settle for unemployment at a chronically high level.
Mitt Romney : We don't have to settle for 47 million people on food stamps.
Mitt Romney : We don't have to settle for 50 percent of kids coming out of college not able to get work.
Mitt Romney : We don't have to settle for 23 million people struggling to find a good job.
Mitt Romney : If I become president, I'll get America working again.
Mitt Romney : I will get us on track to a balanced budget.
Mitt Romney : The president hasn't.
Mitt Romney : I will.
Mitt Romney : I'll make sure we can reform Medicare and Social Security to preserve them for coming -- coming generations.
Mitt Romney : The president said he would.
Mitt Romney : He didn't.
Candy Crowley : Governor...
Mitt Romney : I'll get our incomes up.
Mitt Romney : And by the way, I've done these things.
Mitt Romney : I served as governor and showed I could get them done.
Candy Crowley : Mr. President, last two minutes belong to you.
Barack Obama : Barry, I think a lot of this campaign, maybe over the last four years, has been devoted to this nation that I think government creates jobs, that that somehow is the answer.
Barack Obama : That's not what I believe.
Barack Obama : I believe that the free enterprise system is the greatest engine of prosperity the world's ever known.
Barack Obama : I believe in self-reliance and individual initiative and risk takers being rewarded.
Barack Obama : But I also believe that everybody should have a fair shot and everybody should do their fair share and everybody should play by the same rules, because that's how our economy's grown.
Barack Obama : That's how we built the world's greatest middle class.
Barack Obama : And -- and that is part of what's at stake in this election.
Barack Obama : There's a fundamentally different vision about how we move our country forward.
Barack Obama : I believe Governor Romney is a good man.
Barack Obama : Loves his family, cares about his faith.
Barack Obama : But I also believe that when he said behind closed doors that 47 percent of the country considered themselves victims who refuse personal responsibility, think about who he was talking about.
Barack Obama : Folks on Social Security who've worked all their lives.
Barack Obama : Veterans who've sacrificed for this country.
Barack Obama : Students who are out there trying to hopefully advance their own dreams, but also this country's dreams.
Barack Obama : Soldiers who are overseas fighting for us right now.
Barack Obama : People who are working hard every day, paying payroll tax, gas taxes, but don't make enough income.
Barack Obama : And I want to fight for them.
Barack Obama : That's what I've been doing for the last four years.
Barack Obama : Because if they succeed, I believe the country succeeds.
Barack Obama : When my grandfather fought in World War II and he came back and he got a G.I.
Barack Obama : Bill and that allowed him to go to college, that wasn't a handout.
Barack Obama : That was something that advanced the entire country.
Barack Obama : And I want to make sure that the next generation has those same opportunities.
Barack Obama : That's why I'm asking for your vote and that's why I'm asking for another four years.
Candy Crowley : President Obama, Governor Romney, thank you for being here tonight.
Candy Crowley : On that note we have come to an end of this town hall debate.
Candy Crowley : Our thanks to the participants for their time and to the people of Hofstra University for their hospitality.
Candy Crowley : The next and final debate takes place Monday night at Lynn (ph) University in Boca Raton, Florida.
Candy Crowley : Don't forget to watch.
Candy Crowley : Election Day is three weeks from today.
Candy Crowley : Don't forget to vote.
Candy Crowley : Good night.
